# Our Great God and Savior Chart

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/great_god_savior_chart.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# Our Great God and Savior

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

The following chart lists all the places in the Hebrew Bible and Christian Greek Scriptures where the word Savior is employed in respect to both God and Jesus. This will help the readers appreciate the frequency in which the term is applied to Christ, especially when it is kept it mind that Jesus doesn’t merely save people from calamities, diseases, oppression etc. He also delivers believers from their sins by cleansing them through his blood which he shed as payment for all the iniquities that they have committed:

“She will bear a Son, and you shall call His name JESUS, __for He will save His people from their sins__.” Matthew 1:21 

"to the praise of the glory of His grace which He graciously bestowed on us __in the Beloved__. In Him we have redemption __through His blood and the forgiveness of sins__ according to the riches of His grace,” Ephesians 1:6-7 

“He has delivered us from the power of darkness and has transferred us into the kingdom of His dear Son,  __in whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins__.” Colossians 1:13-14 

“This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, __that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners__ , of whom I am the worst.” 1 Timothy 1:15 

“But if we walk in the light as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, __and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin__ … My little children, I am writing these things to you, so that you do not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, __Jesus Christ the Righteous One.____ He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins__, and not for ours only, __but also for the sins of the whole world__ … I am writing to you, little children, because your sins are forgiven __for His name’s sake__.” 1 John 1:7, 2:1-2, 12 

“and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. __To Him who loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood__ ,” Revelation 1:5

However, this work of saving from sins is only ascribed to Yahweh God, who pardons whomever he so chooses for his own sake:

“Let Israel wait for the Lord! For mercy is found with the Lord; __with Him is great redemption.____He shall redeem Israel from all their iniquities__.” Psalm 130:7-8 

“I, even I, am He who blots out your transgressions __for My own sake__ , and will not remember your sins.” Isaiah 43:25  
  
  


**YAHWEH GOD** | **JESUS CHRIST**  
---|---  
“He said: The Lord is my rock and my fortress __and my deliverer__ ; the God of my strength, in whom I will trust; my shield and the horn of my salvation, my fortress and my sanctuary; __my Savior__ , You save me from violence.” 2 Samuel 22:2-3  “Wondrously show Your lovingkindness, __O Savior of those who take refuge at Your right hand__ From those who rise up _against them_.” Psalm 17:7 New American Standard Bible (NASB) “They forgot __God their Savior__ , Who had done great things in Egypt,” Psalm 106:21 New King James Version (NKJV) “For I am the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, __your Savior__ ; I gave Egypt for your ransom, Ethiopia and Seba in your place… I, even I, am the Lord, __and besides Me there is no savior__. I have declared, __and have saved__ , and I have shown, when there was no strange god among you; therefore, you are My witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God.” Isaiah 43:3, 11-12 “Truly You are a God who hides Yourself, O God of Israel, __the Savior__ … __but Israel shall be saved by the__ __Lord__ __with an everlasting salvation__ ; you shall not be ashamed nor humiliated to all eternity… Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, you fugitives of the nations. They have no knowledge who set up the wood of their carved image, __and pray to a god that cannot save__. Declare and set forth your case; let them take counsel together. Who has declared this from ancient times? Who has told it from that time? Have not I, the Lord? __And there is no God besides Me,____a righteous God and Savior; there is no other besides Me__. Turn to Me and be saved, all the ends of the earth. __For I am God, and there is no other__.” Isaiah 45:15, 17, 20-22 “I will feed those who oppress you with their own flesh, and they shall be drunk with their own blood as with sweet wine. And all flesh shall know that I, the Lord, __am your Savior and your Redeemer__ , the Mighty One of Jacob.” Isaiah 49:26 – cf. 60:16 “For He said, ‘Surely they are My people, sons who will not lie.’ __So He became their Savior__.” Isaiah 63:8  “O the Hope of Israel, __its Savior in time of trouble__ , why should You be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man who turns aside to pitch his tent for a night?” Jeremiah 14:8 “Yet I am the Lord your God ever since the land of Egypt. You know no God but Me, __and there is no savior besides Me__.” Hosea 13:4 “And Mary said: ‘My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.’” Luke 1:46-47 “Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the command __of God our Savior__ , and of the Lord Jesus Christ, our hope,” 1 Timothy 1:1 “for this is good and acceptable in the sight __of God our Savior__ , who desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.” 1 Timothy 2:3-4 “For to this end we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, __who is the Savior of all men__ , especially of those who believe.” 1 Timothy 4:10 “and has in due time revealed His word through preaching, with which I was entrusted according to the command __of God our Savior__ ,” Titus 1:3 “or stealing, but showing complete fidelity, so that they may exemplify the doctrine __of God our Savior__ in all things.” Titus 2:10 “But when the kindness and the love __of God our Savior__ toward mankind appeared,” Titus 3:4 “to __the only wise God our Savior__ , be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen.” Jude 1:25 |  “For unto you is born this day in the City of David __a Savior, who is Christ the Lord__.” Luke 2:11 – cf. 19:10 “They said to the woman, ‘Now we believe, not because of what you said, for we have heard for ourselves and know __that this Man is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world__.’” John 4:42 – cf. 3:17; 6:51; 12:47 “God exalted this Man to His right hand to be __a Ruler and a Savior__ , to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.” Acts 5:31 “From this man’s descendants God has raised __a Savior for Israel__ , Jesus, according to His promise.” Acts 13:23 “For the husband is the head of the wife, __just as Christ is the head and Savior of the church__ , which is His body.” Ephesians 5:23 “But our citizenship is in heaven, from where also we await __for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ__ , who will transform our body of humiliation, so that it may be conformed to His glorious body, __according to the working of His power even to subdue all things to Himself__.” Philippians 3:20-21 “but is now revealed __by the appearing of our Savior, Jesus Christ__ , who has abolished death and has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel,” 2 Timothy 1:10 “To Titus, my own son in the common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father __and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior__.” Titus 1:4 “as we await the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory __of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ__ , who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all lawlessness and purify for Himself a special people, zealous of good works.” Titus 2:13-14 “whom He poured out on us abundantly through __Jesus Christ our Savior__ ,” Titus 3:6 “Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, To those who have received a faith as precious as ours through the righteousness __of our God and Savior Jesus Christ__ …  For in this way the entrance into __the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ__ will be abundantly provided for you.” 2 Peter 1:1, 11 “For if after they have escaped the defilements of the world through the knowledge __of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ__ , and they are again entangled in them and are overcome, the latter end is worse for them than the beginning.” 2 Peter 2:20 “that you should remember the words that were spoken previously by the holy prophets and the commandment __of our Lord and Savior__ spoken through us, the apostles… But grow in the grace and knowledge __of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To Him be glory, both now and forever__. Amen.” 2 Peter 3:2, 18 “In this is love: not that we loved God, but that He loved us __and sent His Son to be the atoning sacrifice for our sins__ … And we have seen and testify that the Father sent the Son __to be the Savior of the world__.” 1 John 4:10, 14  
  
Unless noted otherwise, all quotations taken from the Modern English Version (MEV) of the Holy Bible.
