# The Eternally Praised God

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/eternally_praised_god.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# The Eternally Praised God

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

In this post we are going to present a chart listing all the verses where the inspired NT authors offer doxologies1 to the risen Christ, and place them alongside the ones which are directly addressed to God. We will also quote those where a doxology is offered to God through Jesus Christ his Son. This will show that the very first believers worshiped Jesus in the exact same way that God is worshiped. In fact, apart from Christ one will never find a case where a doxology1 is given to someone other than Yahweh God Almighty. This in itself proves that the first Christians (many of whom were monotheistic Jews) were worshiping Jesus as God, obviously because they undoubtedly believed that he was/is God in the flesh. 

These doxologies1 further confirm what Jesus said in the Gospel: 

“The Father judges no one, but has committed all judgment to the Son, __that all men should honor the Son, JUST AS they honor the Father__. He who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent Him.” John 5:22-23

Hence, by offering doxologies1 to their risen Lord the first believers were simply obeying God’s express command that everyone must honor his beloved Son in the same exact way that they honor him, even though the Holy Bible is emphatic about the fact of Yahweh not allowing anyone to share in his glory and praise:

“I am the Lord, that is My name; _and _My glory_ I will not give to another,__nor _My praise_ to graven images_.” Isaiah 42:8 

“For My own sake, even for My own sake, I will do it; for how can _My name_ be polluted? __And I will not give My glory to another__.” Isaiah 48:11

In other words, Jesus must be God in the flesh in order for the Father to command everyone to give him the same exact praise and glory which only Yahweh is supposed to receive. 

**YAHWEH GOD** | **GOD in/through CHRIST** | **JESUS CHRIST**  
---|---|---  
“‘ __Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting__.’ Then all the people said, ‘ __Amen__ ,’ and ‘ __Praise the Lord__.’” 1 Chronicles 16:36 “So David blessed the Lord in the presence of all the assembly, and David said, ‘ __Blessed are You, O__ __Lord__ __,____the God of Israel, our Father forever and ever__.’” 1 Chronicles 29:10 “Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said: ‘ __Stand up and bless the__ __Lord__ __your God forever and ever!__ Let them bless Your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. ‘” Nehemiah 9:5 “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel __from everlasting and to everlasting. Amen and Amen__.” Psalm 41:13 “ __Blessed be His glorious name forever__ ; and may the whole earth be filled with His glory. __Amen, and Amen__.” Psalm 72:19 “Every day I will bless You, __and I will praise Your name forever and ever__ … My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, __And let all people bless His holy name forever and ever__.” Psalm 145:2, 21 – cf. 89:52; 106:48 “They turned the truth of God into a lie and worshipped and served the creature rather than the Creator, __who is blessed forever. Amen__.” Romans 1:25 “O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments and unfathomable are His ways! ‘For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has become His counselor?’ ‘Or who has first given to Him, and it shall be repaid to him?’ For from Him and through Him and to Him are all things. __To Him be glory forever! Amen__.” Romans 11:33-36 “Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for our sins, that He might deliver us from this present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father,  __to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen__.” Galatians 1:3-5 “Now to God and our Father __be glory forever and ever. Amen__.” Philippians 4:20 “But after you have suffered a little while, the God of all grace, who has called us to His eternal glory through Christ Jesus, will restore, support, strengthen, and establish you.  __To Him be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen__.” 1 Peter 5:10-11 “Now to Him who is able to keep you from falling and to present you blameless before the presence of His glory with rejoicing, to the only wise God our Savior, __be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen__.” Jude 1:24-25 “All the angels stood around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures and fell on their faces before the throne __and worshipped God,____ saying: ‘Amen!____Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving and honor and power and might be to our God forever and ever! Amen__.’” Revelation 7:11-12 “After these things I heard a great sound of many people in heaven, shouting: ‘Alleluia! Salvation and glory and honor and power belong to the Lord our God! For true and righteous are His judgments, because He has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality; and He has avenged on her the blood of His servants.’ Again they said: ‘Alleluia! Her smoke rises forever and ever.’ __The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshipped God who sat on the throne, saying: ‘Amen! Alleluia!__ ’ Then a voice came from the throne, saying: ‘ __Praise our God,____all you His servants and those who fear Him, both small and great!__ ’ Then I heard something like the sound like a great multitude, as the sound of many waters and as the sound of mighty thunderings, saying: ‘Alleluia! For the Lord God Omnipotent reigns! Let us be glad and rejoice and give Him glory, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has made herself ready. It was granted her to be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white.’ Fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints.” Revelation 19:1-8 – cf. 4:1-11 |  “For __the Son of God, Jesus Christ__ , who was preached among you by us, even by Silas, Timothy, and me, was not ‘Yes’ and ‘No.’ In Him it was ‘Yes.’ For all the promises of God in Him are ‘Yes,’ __and in Him ‘Amen,’ to the glory of God through us__.” 2 Corinthians 1:19-20 “Now to Him who has power to establish you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret for long ages past, but now is revealed by the prophetic Scriptures according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all the Gentiles for the obedience of faith, to the only wise God, __through Jesus Christ__ , to whom be glory forever. Amen.” Romans 16:25-27 “Now to Him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly beyond all that we ask or imagine, according to the power that works in us, to Him be the glory in the church __and in Christ Jesus__ throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.” Ephesians 3:20-21 “And whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father __through Him__.” Colossians 3:17 “Now may the God of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the Great Shepherd of the sheep, make you perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you that which is pleasing in His sight, __through Jesus Christ__ , to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.” Hebrews 13:20-21 “If anyone speaks, let him speak as the oracles of God. If anyone serves, let him serve with the strength that God supplies, so that God in all things may be glorified __through Jesus Christ__ , to whom be praise and dominion forever and ever. Amen.” 1 Peter 4:11 |  “ __Your throne, O God, is forever and ever__ ; the scepter of Your kingdom is an upright scepter. You love righteousness and hate wickedness; therefore God, your God, anointed you with the oil of gladness above your companions… and the king will desire your beauty. __Since he is your lord, bow to him__... I will cause your name to be remembered in all generations; __therefore the people will praise you forever and ever__.” Psalm 45:6-7, 11, 17 – cf. Hebrews 1:8-9 “to whom belong the patriarchs, and from whom, according to the flesh, is Christ, __who is over all, God forever blessed. Amen__.” Romans 9:5 “ __I thank Christ Jesus our Lord__ , who has enabled me, because __HE__ counted me faithful and appointed me to the ministry. I was previously a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an insolent man. But I was shown mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. __The grace of our Lord__ overflowed with the faith and love which is __in Christ Jesus__. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, __that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners__ , of whom I am the worst. But I received mercy for this reason, that in me, first, __Jesus Christ might show all patience__ , as an example to those who were to believe __in HIM__ for eternal life.  __Now to the eternal, immortal, invisible King, the only wise God, be honor and glory forever. Amen__.” 1 Timothy 1:12-17 “I command you, in the sight of God, who gives life to all things, and in the sight __of Christ Jesus__ , who testified a good confession before Pontius Pilate, to keep this commandment without blemish, blameless __until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,____ which HE, WHO is the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings and Lord of lords__, will reveal at the proper time.  __HE__ alone has immortality, living in unapproachable light, __WHOM__ no one has seen, nor can see. __To HIM be honor and everlasting power. Amen__.” 1 Timothy 6:13-16 – cf. Revelation 17:14; 19:16  “I charge you therefore before God __and THE LORD JESUS CHRIST, who will JUDGE the living and the dead at HIS appearing and HIS KINGDOM__ … From now on a crown of righteousness is laid up for me, __which THE LORD, THE RIGHTEOUS JUDGE, will give me on that Day__ , and not only to me but also to all __who have loved HIS APPEARING__ … At my first defense no one stood with me, but everyone forsook me. May it not be charged against them.  But __THE LORD__ stood with me and strengthened me, so that through me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. __THE LORD__ will deliver me from every evil work and will preserve me __for HIS HEAVENLY KINGDOM, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen__.” 2 Timothy 4:1, 8, 16-18 “But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. __To Him be glory, both now and forever. Amen__.” 2 Peter 3:18 “and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To Him who loved us and washed us from our sins in His own blood, and has made us kings and priests to His God and Father, __to Him be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen__.” Revelation 1:5-6 “When He had taken the scroll, __the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb__ , each one having a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of saints. And they sang a new song, saying: ‘You are worthy to take the scroll, and to open its seals; for You were slain, and have redeemed us to God by Your blood out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation, and have made us kings and priests unto our God; and we shall reign on the earth.’ Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders __the voices of many angels, numbering ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,____ saying with a loud voice__ _: ‘ _Worthy is the Lamb who was slain__ , to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing!’ __Then I heard EVERY CREATURE which is in heaven and on the earth and under the earth and in the sea, AND ALL THAT ARE IN THEM, saying_ : ‘To Him who sits on the throne _AND TO THE LAMB__ _be blessing and honor and glory and power, forever and ever!’ The four living creatures said, ‘Amen.’ And the twenty-four elders fell down and worshipped Him who lives forever and ever_.” Revelation 5:8-14 – cf. 1:18; 2:8  
  
Unless noted otherwise, all citations taken from the Modern English Version (MEV) of the Holy Bible. 

1 A doxology is basically an ascription of praise to God. Doxologies can either be a hymn or form of words where God is praised and glorified because of who he is and/or for what he has done. This illustrates why doxologies to Christ are so vitally important, since they provide further evidence that Jesus’ own followers began to worship him as God Incarnate from the very start of the Christian faith.
