# Worshiping the Lord Jesus as Jehovah God Almighty

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/worshiping_the_lord.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# Worshiping the Lord Jesus as Jehovah God Almighty

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)**  
**

In the following chart we will list just some of the many passages showing that the inspired Scriptures ascribe the exact same praise, worship, glory and honor to the Lord Jesus which only the sovereign Jehovah is supposed to receive from all creation. We will further cite texts where the Son is worshiped in the same way that God the Father is worshiped, obviously because he is coequal to his Father in essence, dignity, honor, glory and majesty. Unless noted otherwise, all scriptural references will be taken from the Modern English Version (MEV) of the Holy Bible. 

**  
JEHOVAH / GOD THE FATHER** “A son honors his father, and a servant his master. __If then I am a father, where is My honor? And if I am a master, where is My fear?__ says the Lord of Hosts to you, O priests, who despise My name…” Malachi 1:6a  “For I am a great king, says the Lord of Hosts, __and My name is to be feared among the nations__.” Malachi 1:14b “Lord, our Lord, how majestic is your name in all the earth! You have set your glory in the heavens. T __hrough the praise of children and infants__ __you have established a stronghold against your enemies__ , to silence the foe and the avenger.” Psalm 8:1-2 New International Version (NIV) “ __Into Your hand I commit my spirit__ ; You have redeemed me, O Lord, God of truth.” Psalm 31:5 “ __O You who hears prayer__ , to You all flesh will come.” Psalm 65:2 “Exalt the Lord our God, __and worship at His footstool__ —He is holy! Moses and Aaron were among His priests, even Samuel was among them __who called upon His name;____they called upon the Lord, and He answered them__.” Psalm 99:5-6 “You alone are the Lord. You have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them; and You preserve them all. __And the host of heaven worships You__.” Nehemiah 9:6 “All the ends of the world will remember and turn to the Lord, __and all the families of the nations__ __will worship before You__. For kingship belongs to the Lord, and He rules among the nations. All the prosperous ones of the earth will eat __and worship;____all who go down to the dust will bow before Him__ , even he who cannot keep his own soul alive. __Posterity will serve Him__ ; it will be told to generations about the Lord;” Psalm 22:27-30 “ __All nations whom You have made__ __shall come and worship before__ You, O Lord, __and shall glorify Your name__. For You are great and do wondrous deeds; You are God alone.” Psalm 86:9-10 “From one New Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, __all flesh shall come to worship before Me__ , says the Lord.” Isaiah 66:23 “Then the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of all the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints __of the Most High__ , whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, __and all dominions shall serve (yipelachun) and obey Him__.” Daniel 7:27 “Then it will be that all the nations who have come against Jerusalem and survived will go up each year __to worship the King, the__ __Lord__ __of Hosts__ , and to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles. And it will happen that if any of the families of the earth do not go up __to Jerusalem to worship the King, the__ __Lord__ __of Hosts__ , then there will not be rain for them.” Zechariah 14:16-17 “I have sworn by Myself, the word has gone out of My mouth in righteousness and shall not return, __that to Me every knee shall bow,____every tongue shall take an oath__.” Isaiah 45:23 “to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, __be the glory forever. Amen__.” Romans 16:27 “Now to our God and Father __be the glory forever and ever. Amen__.” Philippians 4:18 “Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God _,_be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen__.” 1 Timothy 1:17 | **  
JESUS THE MESSIAH** “The Father judges no one, but has committed all judgment to the Son,  __that all men should honor the Son, JUST AS they honor the Father__. He who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent Him.” John 5:22-23 “For we must all appear __before the judgment seat of Christ__ , that each one may receive his recompense in the body, according to what he has done, whether it was good or bad. Therefore, __knowing the fear of the Lord__ , we persuade men. But we are revealed to God, and I trust we are also revealed in your consciences.” 2 Corinthians 5:10-11 “And do not get drunk with wine, for that is dissipation, but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody with your heart __to the Lord__ ; always giving thanks for all things __in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ__ to God, even the Father; and be subject to one another __in the fear of Christ__.” Ephesians 5:18-21 New American Standard Version (NASB) “The crowds that went before Him and that followed Him cried out: ‘ __Hosanna to the Son of David!__ Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!’… But when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that He did, __and the children crying out in the temple__ , ‘ __Hosanna to the Son of David__ ,’ they were extremely displeased and said to Him, ‘Do You hear what these are saying?’ Jesus said to them, ‘ _Yes. Have you never read,_“Out of the mouth of children and infants__ __You have perfected praise”?__ ’ ” Matthew 21:9, 15-16 “They stoned Stephen as he was calling on God, praying, ‘ __Lord Jesus, receive my spirit__.’ Then he knelt down and cried with a loud voice, ‘ __Lord, do not hold this sin against them__.’ Having said this, he fell asleep.” Acts 7:59-60 “ __And I will do whatever you ask in my name__ , so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.  __You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it__.” John 14:13-14 NIV “To the church of God which is at Corinth, to those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all who __in every place call on the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both their Lord and ours__ :” 1 Corinthians 1:2 “God, who at various times and in diverse ways spoke long ago to the fathers through the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by His Son, whom He has appointed heir of all things, __and through whom He made the world__. He is the brightness of His glory, the express image of Himself, __and upholds all things by the word of His power__. When He had by Himself purged our sins, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. He was made so much better than the angels as He has inherited a more excellent name than they. For to which of the angels did He at any time say: ‘You are My Son; today I have become Your Father’? Or again, ‘I will be a Father to Him, and He shall be a Son to Me’? And again, when He brings the firstborn into the world, He says: ‘ __Let all the angels of God worship Him__.’” Hebrews 1:1-6 “Give the king Your judgments, O God, and Your righteousness to the king’s son… May he have dominion from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth. May those who dwell in the wilderness __bow before him__ , and his enemies lick the dust. May the kings of Tarshish and of the isles bring presents; the kings of Sheba and Seba offer a gift. __May all kings bow down before him;____may all nations serve him__.” Psalm 72:1, 8-11 “But they shall __serve__ the Lord their God __and David their king__ , whom I will raise up for them.” Jeremiah 30:9 “I saw in the night visions, and there was one __like a Son of Man coming with the clouds of heaven__. He came to the Ancient of Days and was presented before Him. There was given to Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, __that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve (yipelachun) Him__. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.” Daniel 7:13-14 “Therefore God highly exalted Him and gave Him the name which is above every name, __that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,____of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord__ , to the glory of God the Father.” Philippians 2:9-11 “When He had taken the scroll, __the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb__ , each one having a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of saints. And they sang a new song, saying: ‘You are worthy to take the scroll, and to open its seals; for You were slain, and have redeemed us to God by Your blood out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation, and have made us kings and priests unto our God; and we shall reign on the earth.’ Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders _the voices of many angels, numbering ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,__ saying with a loud voice_: ‘ __Worthy is the Lamb who was slain__ , to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing!’ _Then I heard _EVERY CREATURE_ which is in heaven and on the earth and under the earth and in the sea, _AND ALL THAT ARE IN THEM_ , saying_: ‘To Him who sits on the throne __AND TO THE LAMB__ be blessing and honor and glory and power, forever and ever!’ The four living creatures said, ‘Amen.’ And the twenty-four elders fell down and worshipped Him who lives forever and ever.” Revelation 5:8-14 “I solemnly charge _you_ in the presence of God __and of Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by His appearing and His kingdom__ … in the future there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which __the Lord, the righteous Judge__ , will award to me on that day; and not only to me, but also to all who have loved __His appearing__ … __The Lord__ will rescue me from every evil deed, and will bring me safely __to His heavenly kingdom; to Him be the glory forever and ever. Amen__.” 2 Timothy 4:1, 8, 18 “but grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. __To Him be the glory, both now and to the day of eternity. Amen__.” 2 Peter 3:18 “and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To Him who loves us and released us from our sins by His blood—and He has made us _to be_ a kingdom, priests to His God and Father— __to Him be the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen__.” Revelation 1:5-6 ****  
---|---  
  
**Further Reading**

[The New Testament on the Worship given to Jesus: Its Significance and Implications for the Deity of Christ]([https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/worship.htm](/articles/4-the_new_testament_on_the_worship_given_to_jesus_its_significance_and_implication) "Opens external link in new window")

[All the Nations will serve Him]([https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_worshiped.htm](/articles/4-all_the_nations_will_serve_him) "Opens external link in new window")

[Jesus and Latreuo ]([https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/latreuo.htm](/articles/4-jesus_and_latreuo) "Opens external link in new window")

[Is the Prophet Daniel Worshiped as God?]([https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/worship_nebudan.htm](/articles/4-is_the_prophet_daniel_worshiped_as_god) "Opens external link in new window")
