# Is Jesus God’s Servant or Son? Pt. 4

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/pais_4.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# Is Jesus God’s Servant or Son?

**More Evidence of Biblical Corruption? Pt. 4**

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

[We resume our discussion](/articles/15-is_jesus_gods_servant_or_son_pt-_3) of the meaning of _pais_ in relation to Christ. 

**Jesus as the Suffering Servant of Yahweh**

The second reason why _pais_ is better rendered as servant is because the context of Acts makes it clear that Jesus is being referred to as the Suffering Servant mentioned in the book of Isaiah, the One whom God appointed and empowered by his Spirit to bring justice and salvation to all the nations and to offer his life as an atoning for sins. These prophecies are commonly referred to as the Servant Songs and are four in number (cf. Isaiah 42:1-7; 49:1-10; 50:4-10; 52:13-53:12). 

In fact, the Greek version of Isaiah known as the Septuagint (LXX) renders the Hebrew word for servant (_ebed_) as _pais_! 

Note, for the instance, the following prophecy:

“Hearken to me, ye islands; and attend, ye Gentiles; after a long time it shall come to pass, saith the Lord: from my mother’s womb he has called my name: and he has made my mouth as a sharp sword, and he has hid me under the shadow of his hand; he has made me as a choice shaft, and he has hid me in his quiver; and said to me, _Thou art**my servant (doulos mou)** , O Israel, and in thee I will be glorified_. Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have given my strength for vanity and for nothing: therefore is my judgment with the Lord, and my labour before my God. And now, thus saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his own servant, to gather Jacob to him and Israel. I shall be gathered and glorified before the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said to me, _It is a great thing for thee to be called_ **_my servant (paida mou)_** , to establish the tribes of Jacob, and to recover the dispersion of Israel: _behold, I have given thee for the covenant of a race, for a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation to the end of the earth_. Thus saith the Lord that delivered thee, the God of Israel, Sanctify him that despises his life, him that is abhorred by the nations that are the servants of princes: kings shall behold him, and princes shall arise, and shall worship him, for the Lord’s sake: for the Holy One of Israel is faithful, and I have chosen thee. Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I succored thee: and I have formed thee, and given thee for a covenant of the nations, to establish the earth, and to cause to inherit the desert heritages: saying to them that are in bonds, Go forth; and bidding them that are in darkness shew themselves. They shall be fed in all the ways, and in all the paths shall be their pasture. They shall not hunger, neither shall they thirst; neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them; but he that has mercy on them shall comfort them, and by fountains of waters shall he lead them.” Isaiah 49:1-10 LXX

According to Luke, Simeon who was filled with the Holy Spirit actually cited Isaiah 49:5-6 when holding the baby Jesus in his hands, thereby indicating that Christ is the fulfillment of this majestic prophecy: 

“Now there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon, and this man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him. And it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. And inspired by the Spirit he came into the temple; and when the parents brought in _the child Jesus (to paidion ‘Iesoun)_ , to do for him according to the custom of the law, he took him up in his arms and blessed God and said, ‘Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word;  _for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou hast prepared in the presence of all peoples, a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to thy people Israel_.’ And his father and his mother marveled at what was said about him; and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, ‘Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and for a sign that is spoken against (and a sword will pierce through your own soul also), that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed.’” Luke 2:25-35 

And here is the other major Servant Song:

“ _Behold,**my servant (ho pais mou)** shall understand, **and be exalted, and glorified (kai hypsothesetai kai doxasthesetai) exceedingly**_. As many shall be amazed at thee, so shall thy face be without glory from men, and thy glory shall not be honoured by the sons of men. Thus shall many nations wonder at him; and kings shall keep their mouths shut: for they to whom no report was brought concerning him, shall see; and they who have not heard, shall consider.” Isaiah 52:13-15 

“O Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? We brought a report as _of_ a child before him; _he is_ as a root in a thirsty land: he has no form nor comeliness; and we saw him, but he had no form nor beauty. But his form was ignoble, and inferior to that of the children of men; _he was_ a man in suffering, and acquainted with the bearing of sickness, for his face is turned from _us_ : he was dishonoured, and not esteemed. _He bears our sins, and is pained for us_ : yet we accounted him to be in trouble, and in suffering, and in affliction. _But he was wounded on account of our sins, and was bruised because of our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and by his bruises we were healed_. All we as sheep have gone astray; every one has gone astray in his way; _and the Lord gave him up for our sins_. And he, because of his affliction, opens not his mouth: he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before the shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. In _his_ humiliation his judgment was taken away: who shall declare his generation? _for his life is taken away from the earth: because of the iniquities of my people he was led to death_. And I will give the wicked for his burial, and the rich for his death; _for he practised no iniquity, nor craft with his mouth_. The Lord also is pleased to purge him from his stroke. If ye can give an offering for sin, your soul shall see a long-lived seed: _the Lord also is pleased to take away from the travail of his soul, to shew him light, and to form him with understanding;_ **_to justify the just one (dikaion) who serves many well_** _; and he shall bear their sins_. Therefore he shall inherit many, and he shall divide the spoils of the mighty; _because his soul was delivered to death: and he was numbered among the transgressors; and he bore the sins of many, and was delivered because of their iniquities_.” Isaiah 53:1-12

Now compare the language used to describe the exaltation and glorification of the Servant with the following passages from Acts:

“Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants upon his throne, he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption. ** _This Jesus God raised up (anestesen)_** , and of that we all are witnesses. ** _Being therefore exalted (hypsotheis) at the right_**** _hand of God_** , and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which you see and hear.” Acts 2:30-33 

“The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, _the_ _God of our fathers_ _,_ **_glorified his servant Jesus (edoxasen ton paida autou 'Iesoun)_** , whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had decided to release him. But you denied **_the Holy and Righteous One (ton hagion kai dikaion)_** , and asked for a murderer to be granted to you,  _and killed the Author of life_ , whom God raised from the dead. To this we are witnesses. And his name, by faith in his name, has made this man strong whom you see and know; and the faith which is through Jesus has given the man this perfect health in the presence of you all.” Acts 3:13-16 

“The God of our fathers raised Jesus whom you killed by hanging him on a tree. ** _God exalted him (hypsosen) at his right hand as Leader and Savior_** _, to give repentance to Israel and_ _forgiveness of sins_.” Acts 5:30-31 

“Was there ever a prophet your ancestors did not persecute? _They even killed those who predicted the coming of**the Righteous One (tou dikaiou)**_. And now you have betrayed and murdered him—”Acts 7:52 

“A man named Ananias came to see me. He was a devout observer of the law and highly respected by all the Jews living there. He stood beside me and said, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight!’ And at that very moment I was able to see him. Then he said: ‘The God of our ancestors has chosen you to know his will _and to see**the Righteous One (ton dikaion)** and to hear words from his mouth_. You will be his witness to all people of what you have seen and heard. And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name.’” Acts 22:12-16

It is apparent that the above passages have deliberately employed the very language of Isaiah 52:13-53:12 to describe Christ in order to identify him as the Servant whom God exalted and glorified after having given up his life as a vicarious sacrifice for the sins of humanity. In fact, we find this section of Isaiah quoted or alluded to all throughout the NT writings, just as the following verses amply testify:

“And when Jesus entered Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law lying sick with a fever. He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she rose and began to serve him. That evening they brought to him many who were oppressed by _demons, and he cast out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick.____This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah: ‘He took our illnesses and bore our diseases_.’” Matthew 8:14-17 – cf. Isaiah 53:4 

“But the Pharisees went out and took counsel against him, how to destroy him. Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there. And many followed him, _and he healed them all_ , and ordered them not to make him known.  _This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah_ _: ‘Behold,**my servant (ho pais mou)** whom I have chosen, my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall proclaim justice to the Gentiles. He will not wrangle or cry aloud, nor will any one hear his voice in the streets; he will not break a bruised reed or quench a smoldering wick, till he brings justice to victory; **and in his name will the Gentiles hope**_.’” Matthew 12:14-21 – cf. Isaiah 42:1-4 

“ _It is written:**‘** And he was numbered with the transgressors**’**_ ; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment.” Luke 22:37 – cf. Isaiah 53:12 

“Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, ‘Go south to the road—the desert road—that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.’ So he started out, and on his way he met an Ethiopian eunuch, an important official in charge of all the treasury of the Kandake (which means ‘queen of the Ethiopians’). This man had gone to Jerusalem to worship, and on his way home was sitting in his chariot reading the Book of Isaiah the prophet. The Spirit told Philip, ‘Go to that chariot and stay near it.” Then Philip ran up to the chariot _and heard the man reading Isaiah the prophet_. ‘Do you understand what you are reading?’ Philip asked. ‘How can I,’ he said, ‘unless someone explains it to me?’ So he invited Philip to come up and sit with him. _This is the passage of Scripture the eunuch was reading:_ **_‘_** _He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth. In his humiliation he was deprived of justice. Who can speak of his descendants? For his life was taken from the earth.**’**_ The eunuch asked Philip, ‘Tell me, please, who is the prophet talking about, himself or someone else?’ _Then Philip began with that very passage of Scripture and told him the good news about Jesus_.” Acts 8:26-35 – cf. Isaiah 53:7-8 

“To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps. ‘** _He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth_**.’ When they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate; when he suffered, he made no threats. Instead, he entrusted himself to him who judges justly. ‘** _He himself bore our sins_** ’ in his body on the cross, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; ‘** _by his wounds you have been healed_**.’ For ‘** _you were like sheep going astray_** ,’ but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.” 1 Peter 2:21-25 – cf. Isaiah 53:4-9

With the foregoing in perspective, it seems rather obvious that the reason why Acts employs the word _pais_ in relation to Christ is for the specific purpose of identifying him as the Servant of God whom the prophet Isaiah announced would come to save sinners by his sacrificial death on their behalf. In light of this it seems reasonably certain that the word refers to Christ’s role as God’s Servant, not Son or Child, and should therefore be translated as such. 

Now does this mean that these Muslim apologists are right that the earliest Christian proclamation was that Jesus is God’s Servant, not his Son? Not in the least, just as we saw in the previous sections. In fact, as we are about to document [in the next segment of our reply](/articles/15-is_jesus_gods_servant_or_son_pt-_5), this description of Christ actually backfires against these Islamic polemicists since it proves that Muhammad was a false prophet.
