# The Incomprehensible and Omniscient Son of God

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/incomprehensible_son.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# The Incomprehensible and Omniscient Son of God

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

The God-breathed Scriptures teach that the Lord Jesus is the unique, divine Son of God who became a flesh and blood human being at a specific point in time. As such, the one Person of Christ possesses two distinct natures in all their fullness, namely a divine and human nature. This is why believers throughout the centuries have referred to him as _Theanthropos_ , i.e., the God-Man (cf. Matthew 1:16, 18-25; 2:1-6, 12; Matthew 16:13-17; Luke 1:26-35, 41-45; 2:10-11; John 1:1-14, 18; 8:40, 42, 56-59; 17:5; 1 Corinthians 8:6; 15:1-23; 45-49; Philippians 2:5-11; 3:20-21; Colossians 1:13-18; 2:9; 1 Timothy 2:5-6; 3:16; Titus 2:13-14; Hebrews 1:1-3, 8-12; 2 Peter 1:1; Revelation 1:7-8, 17-18; 2:8; 22:12-13, 16, 20). 

As God, Christ is eternal, immutable, omni-benevolent, omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient etc. 

As Man, Jesus was limited to time and space, as well as being subject to change, weariness, fatigue etc. This is why the Holy Bible describes him as growing and changing over time, and of not knowing everything. 

“But concerning that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.” Mark 13:32 – cf. Matthew 24:36 

“And the Child grew and became strong in spirit, filled with wisdom. And the grace of God was upon Him… And Jesus increased in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and men.” Luke 2:40, 52 

“In the days of His flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications with loud cries and tears to Him who was able to save Him from death. He was heard because of His godly fear. Though He was a Son, __He learned obedience__ through the things that He suffered,” Hebrews 5:7-8

What this shows is that the full divine omniscience that Jesus possessed as God was not in his waking human consciousness. 

With that mind, we have decided to produce a chart listing all the NT verses that ascribe to Jesus Christ the same exact knowledge that the OT says only Yahweh possesses. The texts that we are about to present all highlight the fact that Christ knows everything and everyone to the same degree and to the same extent that Yahweh does, obviously because he is Yahweh in the flesh. These passages further demonstrate that only the Father is capable of knowing the Son, and even affirm that the Son actually knows the Father in the exact same way that the Father knows him, which is why the Son alone is qualified to reveal God to man. This establishes that the Son is an incomprehensible and omniscient Being in the exact same way that the Father is. 

**Yahweh God** | **Jesus Christ**  
---|---  
“then hear in heaven Your dwelling place, __and forgive__ , and act, and render to everyone according to all his ways, __whose hearts You know—for only You know the hearts of the sons of men__ —” 1 Kings 8:39 “As for you, Solomon my son, know the God of your fathers and serve Him with a whole heart and with a willing spirit, __for the__ __Lord__ __searches every heart and understands the intent of every thought__. If you seek Him, He will be found by you, but if you forsake Him, He will abandon you forever.”1 Chronicles 28:9 “Do you know how the clouds are balanced, the wondrous works of Him __who is perfect in knowledge?__ ” Job 37:16 “would not God search this out? __For He knows the secrets of the heart__.” Psalm 44:21 “Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits, __who forgives all your iniquities,____who heals all your diseases, who redeems your life from the pit__ , who crowns you with lovingkindness and tender mercies,” Psalm 103:2-4 “O Lord, You have searched me and known me. You know when I sit down and when I get up; You understand my thought from far off. You search my path and my lying down and are aware of all my ways. __For there is not a word on my tongue,____but behold, O Lord, You know it fully__. You put Yourself behind and before me, and keep Your hand on me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is lofty, and I cannot fathom it.” Psalm 139:1-6 “He counts the number of the stars; He calls them all by their names. Great is our Lord and great in power; __His understanding is without measure__.” Psalm 147:4-5 “See, the Lord God will come with a strong hand, and His arm shall rule for Him; __see, His reward is with Him,____and His recompense before Him__ … Have you not known? Have you not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, does not faint, nor is He weary? __His understanding is inscrutable__.” Isaiah 40:10, 28 – cf. 62:11; Psalm 62:12; Proverbs 24:12  “Present your case, says the Lord. Bring forth your arguments, says the King of Jacob. Let them bring them forth, __and show us__ __what shall happen__ ; let them show the former things, what they were, that we may consider them and know their outcome, __or declare to us things to come.____Show the things that are to come hereafter__ , that we may know that you are gods; do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed and see it together. Indeed you are nothing, and your work amounts to nothing; he who chooses you is an abomination.” Isaiah 41:21-24 “Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled. __Who among them can declare this,____and show us former things?__ Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified; or let them hear and say, ‘It is true.’ You are My witnesses, says the Lord, and My servant whom I have chosen __that you may know and believe Me,____and understand that I am He__. Before Me there was no God formed, nor shall there be after Me. I, even I, am the Lord, and besides Me there is no savior. __I have declared__ , and have saved, __and I have shown__ , when there was no strange god among you; therefore, you are My witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. Indeed, from eternity I am He;” Isaiah 43:9-12 “Remember this, and show yourselves men; bring it to mind again, O transgressors. Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is no one like Me, __declaring the end from the beginning,____and from ancient times the things that are not yet done__ , saying, ‘My counsel shall stand, and I will do all My good pleasure,’ calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man who executes My counsel from a far country. __Indeed, I have spoken it; I will also bring it to pass.____I have purposed it; I will also do it__.” Isaiah 46:8-11 “ __I, the__ __Lord__ __, search the heart,____I test the mind__ , even to give to every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his deeds.” Jeremiah 17:10 – cf. 11:20; 29:23 “For who has despised the day of small things? These seven will rejoice and see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel. __These are the eyes of the__ __Lord__ __, which survey to and fro throughout the earth__.” Zechariah 4:10 – cf. 3:9; 2 Chronicles 16:9; Psalm 11:4 “He said to them, ‘You are those who justify yourselves before men, __but God knows your hearts__. For that which is highly esteemed before men is an abomination before God.’” Luke 16:15 – cf. Acts 15:8; Romans 8:27 “O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! __How unsearchable are His judgments__ __and unfathomable are His ways! ‘For who has known the mind of the Lord?__ Or who has become His counselor?’ ‘Or who has first given to Him, and it shall be repaid to him?’” Romans 11:33-36 “There is no creature that is not revealed in His sight, for all things are bare and exposed to the eyes of Him to whom we must give account.” Hebrews 4:13 “For if our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart __and knows everything__.” 1 John 3:20 |  “ __Jesus knew their thoughts__ and said to them, ‘Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation. And every city or house divided against itself will not stand.’” Matthew 12:25 “For the Son of Man shall come with His angels in the glory of His Father, __and then He will repay every man according to his works__.” Matthew 16:27 “When they came to Capernaum, those who collected tax money came to Peter and said, ‘Does your Teacher not pay the tax?’ He said, ‘Yes.’ And when he came home, Jesus stopped him, saying, ‘What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth take custom or taxes? From their own sons or from strangers?’ Peter said to Him, ‘From strangers.’ Jesus said to him, ‘Then the sons are free. However, lest we offend them, __go to the sea and cast a hook, and take the first fish that comes up. And when you open its mouth, you will find a coin. Take it and give it to them for you and Me__.’” Matthew 17:24-27 “ __But Jesus perceived their wickedness__ and said, ‘Why test Me, you hypocrites? Show Me the tax money.’ They brought Him a denarius.” Matthew 22:18 “When Jesus saw their faith, He said to the paralytic, “ __Son, your sins are forgiven you__.’ But some of the scribes were sitting there, __reasoning in their hearts__ , ‘Why does this Man speak such blasphemies? __Who can forgive sins but God alone?’__ __IMMEDIATELY, when Jesus perceived IN HIS SPIRIT that they so reasoned WITHIN THEMSELVES__ , He said to them, ‘ __Why do you contemplate these things IN YOUR HEARTS?__ Which is easier to say to the paralytic: “Your sins are forgiven you,” or to say, “Rise, take up your bed and walk”?  __But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins__ ,’ He said to the paralytic, ‘I say to you, rise, and take up your bed, and go your way to your house.’ Immediately he rose, picked up the bed, and went out in front of them all, so that they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, ‘We never saw anything like this!’” Mark 2:5-11 – cf. Matthew 9:1-8; Luke 5:17-26 “From there He arose and went to the region of Tyre and Sidon. He entered a house and would have no one know it. Yet He could not be hidden. For a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of Him, and came and fell at His feet. The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. And she begged Him to cast the demon out of her daughter. Jesus said to her, ‘Let the children first be filled. For it is not fitting to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs.’ She answered, ‘Yes, Lord. Yet the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.’ __Then He said to her,____‘For this answer, go your way. The demon has gone out of your daughter.’__ __When she had come to her house, she found the demon had gone out, and her daughter lying on the bed__.” Mark 7:24-30 “He came to Capernaum. And being in the house, He asked them, ‘What was it that you disputed among yourselves on the way?’  __But they kept silent, for on the way they had disputed among themselves who was the greatest__. He sat down and called the twelve. And He said to them, ‘ __If anyone desires to be first, he must be last of all and servant of all__.’” Mark 9:33-35 “When they drew near Jerusalem and came to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, He sent out two of His disciples and said to them, ‘Go into the village opposite you. As soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here. If anyone says to you, “Why are you doing this?” say “The Lord has need of it,” and immediately he will send it here.’ __They went their way and found the colt tied by the door outside on the street__. And they untied it. Some of those who stood there said to them, ‘What are you doing untying the colt?’  __They answered just as Jesus had commanded__. And they let them go.” Mark 11:1-6 “While He was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as He sat at supper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of ointment, a very costly spikenard. She broke the jar and poured the ointment on His head. There were some with indignation within themselves, saying, ‘Why was this ointment wasted? It might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor.’ And they grumbled against her. Jesus said, ‘Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for Me. You always have the poor with you, and whenever you wish, you may do good to them. But you will not always have Me. She has done what she could. She has come beforehand to anoint My body for burial.  __Truly I say to you, wherever this gospel will be preached throughout the whole world, what she has done will also be spoken of as a memorial to her__.’” Mark 14:3-9 “On the first day of Unleavened Bread, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb, His disciples said to Him, ‘Where do You want us to prepare for You to eat the Passover?’ So He sent two of His disciples and said to them, ‘Go into the city, and a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you there. Follow him. Wherever he enters, say to the owner of the house, “The Teacher says, Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?” He will show you a large upper room, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us there.’ His disciples went out, and came into the city, __and found it as He had told them__. And they prepared the Passover.” Mark 14:12-16 “Jesus said to them, ‘All of you will fall away on account of Me this night, for it is written: “I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.” But after I have risen, I will go before you to Galilee.’ Peter said to Him, ‘Even if all fall away, I will not.’ Jesus said to him, ‘Truly, I say to you that this day, during the night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny Me three times.’ But he said more vehemently, ‘If I must die with You, I will not deny You.’ They all said the same thing… They laid hands on Him and seized Him. Then one of those who stood by drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his ear. Jesus said to them, ‘Have you come out with swords and clubs to arrest Me as you would a thief? Every day I was with you in the temple teaching, and you did not seize Me. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled.’  __Then they all deserted Him and fled__ … While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came. When she saw Peter warming himself, she looked at him and said, ‘You also were with Jesus of Nazareth.’ But he denied it, saying, ‘I neither know nor understand what you are saying.’ Then he went out to the porch, __and a rooster crowed__. The servant girl saw him again and began to say to those who stood by, ‘This man is one of them.’ But again, he denied it. A little while later, those who stood by said again to Peter, ‘Surely, you are one of them. For you are a Galilean, and your speech confirms it.’ Peter began to invoke a curse on himself, and to swear, ‘I do not know this Man of whom you speak.’ __And the rooster crowed a second time. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said to him, ‘__ __Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny Me three times.”__ __And when he thought on this, he wept__.” Mark 14:27-31, 46-50, 66-72 “As the people pressed upon Him to hear the word of God, He stood by the Lake of Gennesaret and saw two boats beside the lake. But the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets. He entered one of the boats, which was Simon’s, and asked him to thrust it out a little from the land. Then He sat down and taught the people from the boat. When He had finished speaking, He said to Simon, ‘ __Launch out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch__.’ Simon answered Him, ‘Master, we have worked all night and have caught nothing. But at Your word I will let down the net.’ When they had done this, __they caught a great number of fish, and their net was tearing__. So they signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them.__And they came and filled both boats, so that they began to sink__. When Simon Peter saw it, __he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, ‘Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord__.’ For he and all who were with him were astonished at the catch of fish which they had taken, and so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. Then Jesus said to Simon, ‘Do not fear. From now on you will catch men.’” Luke 5:1-10 “ __But He knew their thoughts__ , and He said to the man who had the withered hand, ‘Rise and stand in front.’ So he rose and stood in front.” Luke 6:8 “A dispute arose among them as to which of them was the greatest. Jesus, __perceiving the thought of their heart__ , took a child and put him by Him,” Luke 9:46-47 “All things have been handed over to Me by My Father. And no one knows who the Son is __but the Father__ , and who the Father is __but the Son and he to whom the Son desires to reveal Him__.” Luke 10:22 – cf. Matthew 11:27 “Philip found Nathanael and said to him, ‘We have found Him of whom Moses in the law, as well as the prophets, wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.’ Nathanael said to him, ‘Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?’ Philip said to him, “Come and see.’ Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him and said concerning him, ‘Here is an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.’ Nathanael said to Him, “How do You know me?’ Jesus answered him, ‘ __Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I SAW YOU__.’ Nathanael answered Him, ‘Rabbi, You are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!’ Jesus answered him, ‘Because I said to you, “I saw you under the fig tree,” do you believe? You will see greater things than these.’ And He said to him, ‘Truly, truly I say to you, hereafter you shall see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.” John 1:45-51 “Now when He was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many believed in His name when they saw the signs which He did. But Jesus did not entrust Himself to them, __because He knew all men__ , and did not need anyone to bear witness of man, __for He knew what was in man__.” John 2:23-25 “Jesus said to her, ‘Go, call your husband, and come here.’ The woman answered, “I have no husband.’ Jesus said to her, ‘You are right in saying, “I have no husband,” __for you have had five husbands, and he whom you now have is not your husband.__ So you have spoken truthfully.’… The woman then left her water pot, went her way into the city, and said to the men, ‘ __Come, see a Man who told me all things that I ever did__. Could this be the Christ?’… Many of the Samaritans of that city believed in Him because of the word of the woman __who testified, ‘He told me all that I ever did__.’” John 4:16-18, 28-29, 39 “After the two days He departed from there and went to Galilee. For Jesus Himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country. Then, when He came to Galilee, the Galileans welcomed Him, having seen all the things He did at Jerusalem at the feast. For they had also gone to the feast. So Jesus came again to Cana of Galilee where He had made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick in Capernaum. When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to Him, pleading that He would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. Then Jesus said to him, ‘Unless you see signs and wonders, you will not believe.’ The nobleman said to Him, “Sir, come down before my child dies.’ __Jesus said to him,____‘Go your way. Your son lives__.’ And the man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way. While he was going down, his servants met him and told him, ‘Your son lives!’ When he inquired of them the hour when he began to heal, they answered, ‘Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.’ __Then the father knew that it was at the same hour in which Jesus said to him,____‘Your son lives__.’ So he and his whole household believed. This was the second sign that Jesus did when He had come from Judea to Galilee.” John 4:43-54 “I do not receive honor from men.  __But I know you__ , that you do not have the love of God in you.” John 5:41-42 “‘But there are some of you who do not believe.’ __For Jesus knew from the beginning__ who they were who did not believe, and who it was who would betray Him” John 6:64 “After He said this, He said to them, ‘ __Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep__. But I am going that I may awaken him from sleep.’ Then His disciples said, ‘Lord, if he is sleeping, he will be well.’ Jesus had spoken of his death. But they thought that He was speaking of getting rest through sleep. So then Jesus plainly told them, ‘ __Lazarus is dead__. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless let us go to him.’” John 11:11-15 “Jesus said to him, ‘He who is bathed needs only to wash his feet, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not all of you.’ __For He knew who would betray Him__. Therefore He said, ‘Not all of you are clean.’… I do not speak concerning all of you. I know whom I have chosen, but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, ‘He who eats bread with Me has lifted up his heel against Me.’ __Now I tell you before it happens, that when it does happen, you may believe that I am He__.” John 13:10-11, 18-19 “I have told you these things in proverbs. But the time is coming when I will no longer speak to you in proverbs, for I will speak to you plainly about the Father. On that day you will ask in My name. I am not saying to you that I shall ask the Father on your behalf. For the Father Himself loves you, because you have loved Me, and have believed __that I came from God.________I came from the Father and have come into the world. As I said, I am leaving the world and am going to the Father__.’ His disciples said to Him, ‘Yes! __Now You are speaking plainly and with no figure of speech.____ Now we know that You know everything and do not need anyone to question You__. By this we believe that You came from God.’ Jesus answered them, ‘ __Do you now believe?__ ’” John 16:25-31 “Now Judas, who betrayed Him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with His disciples. So Judas, having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, came there with lanterns and torches and weapons. Jesus therefore, __knowing everything that would happen to Him__ , went forward and said to them, ‘Whom do you seek?’ They answered Him, “Jesus of Nazareth.’ Jesus said to them, ‘I am He.’ And Judas, who betrayed Him, was standing with them.  __When He said,____‘I am He,’__ __they drew back and fell to the ground__.” John 18:2-6 “After this, Jesus revealed Himself again to the disciples at the Sea of Tiberias. He revealed Himself this way: 2 Simon Peter; Thomas, called The Twin; Nathanael of Cana in Galilee; the sons of Zebedee; and two more of His disciples were together. Simon Peter said to them, ‘I am going fishing.’ Then they said to him, ‘We will go with you.’ They went out and immediately entered the boat. But that night they caught nothing. When the morning came, Jesus stood on the shore. But the disciples did not know that it was Jesus. Jesus said to them, ‘Children, do you have any fish?’ They answered Him, ‘No.’ __He said to them,____‘Throw the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.’__ __So they threw it, and now they were not able to draw it in because of the abundance of fish.____Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, ‘It is the Lord!__ ’ When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his outer garment, for he had taken it off, and jumped into the sea. The other disciples came in the little boat, dragging the net full of fish. For they were not far from land, but about three hundred feet away. When they came to land, __they saw a charcoal fire there with fish lying on it, and bread__. Jesus said to them, ‘Bring some of the fish which you have just caught.’ Simon Peter went up and dragged the net, __full of one hundred and fifty-three large fish, to land. Although there were so many, the net was not torn__ … He said to him the third time, ‘Simon, son of John, do you love Me?’ Peter was grieved because He asked him the third time, ‘Do you love Me?’ He said to Him, ‘ __Lord, You know everything__. You know that I love You.’ Jesus said to him, ‘Feed My sheep.’” John 21:1-11, 17 “The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, concerning all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day when He was taken up, after He had given commandments through the Holy Spirit __to the apostles whom He had chosen__ … So when they had come together, they asked Him, ‘ __Lord__ , will You at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?’ He said to them, ‘It is not for you to know the times or the dates, which the Father has fixed by His own authority.’… ‘Therefore, of these men who have accompanied us while __the Lord Jesus__ went in and out among us,’… Then they prayed, ‘ __You, Lord, who knows the hearts of all men__ , show which of these two __You have chosen__ to take the place in this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, to go to his own place.’ ” Acts 1:1-2, 6-7, 21, 24-25 “in the day when, according to my gospel, God will judge the secrets of men __through Jesus Christ__.” Romans 2:16 “For I know nothing against myself. Yet I am not justified by this. __But He who judges me is the Lord__. Therefore judge nothing before the appointed time __until the Lord comes. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and will reveal the purposes of the hearts__. Then everyone will have commendation from God.” 1 Corinthians 4:4-5 – cf. 1:7-8; 16:22 “To me, the very least of all saints, this grace was given, to preach to the Gentiles __the incomprehensible riches of Christ__ ,” Ephesians 3:8 “that their hearts may be comforted, being knit together in love, and receive all the riches and assurance of full understanding, and knowledge of the mystery of God, both of the Father and of Christ,  __in whom are hidden ALL the treasures of wisdom and knowledge__ … For in Him lives all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.” Colossians 2:2-3, 9 “To the angel of the church in Thyatira write: ‘ __The Son of God__ , who has eyes like a flame of fire, and whose feet are like fine brass, __says these things:________I know your works__ , love, service, faith, and your patience, and that your last works are more than the first… and all the churches shall know __that I am He who searches the hearts and minds__. I will give to each one of you according to your deeds.’” Revelation 2:18-19, 23b “I saw a Lamb in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, standing as though it had been slain, having seven horns __and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth__.” Revelation 5:6  
  
Unless noted otherwise, all biblical citations taken from the Modern English Version (MEV) of the Holy Bible. 

**Related Articles**

[Revisiting Christ’s Ignorance of the Day or Hour](/articles/15-revisiting_christs_ignorance_of_the_day_or_hour)
