# Appearances of Christ in Daniel

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/christ_daniel.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# Divine Encounters of the OT –

**The book of Daniel’s witness to God’s Uniplurality**

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

The canonical book of Daniel is a truly fascinating prophetic scripture with all of its detailed prophecies and descriptions of heavenly beings. Some of the most intriguing and wondrous depictions of God and his heavenly host are found in this inspired writing, such as in the following example.

“In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a revelation was given to Daniel (who was called Belteshazzar). Its message was true and it concerned a great war. The understanding of the message came to him in a vision. At that time I, Daniel, mourned for three weeks. I ate no choice food; no meat or wine touched my lips; and I used no lotions at all until the three weeks were over. On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was standing on the bank of the great river, the Tigris, **_I looked up and there before me was _a man dressed in linen_ , with a belt of the finest gold around his waist. His body also was like beryl, his face had the appearance of lightning, his eyes were like flaming torches, his arms and feet like the gleam of polished bronze, and the sound of his words like the sound of a tumult_**. Now I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, while the men who were with me did not see the vision; **_nevertheless, a great dread fell on them, and they ran away to hide themselves. So I was left alone and saw this great vision; yet no strength was left in me, for my natural color turned to a deathly pallor, and I retained no strength_**. But I heard the sound of his words; and as soon as I heard the sound of his words, _**I fell into a deep sleep on my face, with my face to the ground**_. _**Then behold, a hand touched me and set me trembling on my hands and knees. He said to me, ‘O Daniel, man of high esteem, understand the words that I am about to tell you and stand upright, for I have now been sent to you.’**_ And when he had spoken this word to me, I stood up trembling. Then he said to me, ‘Do not be afraid, Daniel, for from the first day that you set your heart on understanding this and on humbling yourself before your God, your words were heard, and I have come in response to your words. But the prince of the kingdom of Persia was withstanding me for twenty-one days; then behold, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, for I had been left there with the kings of Persia. Now I have come to explain to you what will happen to your people in the future, for the vision concerns a time yet to come.’ _**While he was saying this to me**_ , I bowed with my face toward the ground and was speechless. **__Then one who looked like the sons of men touched my lips__** , and I opened my mouth and began to speak. I said to the one standing before me, ‘I am overcome with anguish because of the vision, my lord, and I am helpless. How can I, your servant, talk with you, my lord? My strength is gone and I can hardly breathe.’ **__Again the one who looked like a man touched me and gave me strength. ‘Do not be afraid, O man highly esteemed,’__** he said. ‘Peace! Be strong now; be strong.’ When he spoke to me, I was strengthened and said, ‘Speak, my lord, since you have given me strength.’ _**So he said**_ , ‘Do you know why _**I have come to you?**_ Soon I will return to fight against the prince of Persia, and when I go, the prince of Greece will come; but first I will tell you what is written in the Book of Truth. (No one supports me against them except Michael, your prince.)’” Daniel 10:1-21

What Daniel saw in this particular vision is truly astonishing, as well as breathtaking, not only because of the appearance of the beings described throughout this chapter but also for the implications this encounter has on our understanding of the nature of God. What we may have here in this event is another OT indication of God’s uniplurality, e.g. the one true God exists as more than one Divine Person. 

A closer reading of the passage seems to suggest that Daniel may have seen at least two figures here, One who was dressed in fine linen and described as looking like a man and like the sons of men. The other figure being the one whose hand touched Daniel in order to strengthen the prophet so he could be able to communicate with him. This is the same figure that received assistance from Michael against the prince of Persia, and may have been Gabriel since he was the angel who appeared on previous occasions to bring God’s revelations to this blessed prophet:

“While I, Daniel, was watching the vision and trying to understand it, **_there before me stood _one who looked like a man_. And I heard _a man's voice_ from the Ulai calling,_** ‘** _Gabriel, tell this man the meaning of the vision_**.’ As he came near the place where I was standing, I was terrified and fell prostrate. ‘Son of man,’ he said to me, ‘** __understand that the vision concerns the time of the end__**.’ While he was speaking to me, I was in a deep sleep, with my face to the ground. **__Then he touched me and raised me to my feet__**. He said: ‘I am going to tell you what will happen later in the time of wrath, because the vision concerns the appointed time of the end.’” Daniel 8:15-19

“While I was speaking and praying, confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel and making my request to the LORD my God for his holy hill - while I was still in prayer, **_Gabriel, the man I had seen in the earlier vision_** , came to me in swift flight about the time of the evening sacrifice. He instructed me and said to me, ‘** __Daniel, I have now come to give you insight and understanding__**. As soon as you began to pray, an answer was given, **__which I have come to tell you, for you are highly esteemed__**. Therefore, consider the message and understand the vision:’” Daniel 9:20-23

Later on Daniel sees two other beings that appear alongside the men who were already present:

“At that time Michael, the great prince who protects your people, will arise. There will be a time of distress such as has not happened from the beginning of nations until then. But at that time your people—everyone whose name is found written in the book—will be delivered. Multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake: some to everlasting life, others to shame and everlasting contempt. Those who are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead many to righteousness, like the stars for ever and ever. But you, Daniel, close up and seal the words of the scroll until the time of the end. Many will go here and there to increase knowledge.’ Then I, Daniel, looked, **_and there before me stood two others, one on this bank of the river and one on the opposite bank. And he said to _the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river_ , ‘How long shall the fulfillment of these wonders be?’ _The man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, lifted his right hand and his left hand toward heaven, and I heard him swear by him who lives forever_ , saying_**, ‘It will be for a time, times and half a time. When the power of the holy people has been finally broken, all these things will be completed.’ I heard, but I did not understand. So I asked, ‘My lord, what will the outcome of all this be?’ He replied, ‘Go your way, Daniel, because the words are closed up and sealed until the time of the end. Many will be purified, made spotless and refined, but the wicked will continue to be wicked. None of the wicked will understand, but those who are wise will understand.’” Daniel 12:1-9

Here we see the Man in linen standing above the river, which may signify his exalted status over the rest. 

In fact, there are additional factors that this particular Agent may not have been Gabriel or Michael but a Being of superior rank. 

In the first place, since Daniel had no problem referring to Gabriel by name this indicates that he could have easily identified this specific figure of Daniel 10 as Gabriel. And yet he doesn’t do so and the context implies that Daniel didn’t even recognize him. 

Secondly, Daniel’s reaction at seeing this Being further indicates that he wasn’t Gabriel. The prophet reacts differently in the presence of this specific Man than he did when Gabriel came to him. In fact, his reaction is similar to the way individuals respond when they are in the presence of God. More on this later. 

Third, in 8:16 Daniel heard a man’s voice command Gabriel from between the banks of the Ulai River and in 12:6 the prophet saw the Man in linen standing above the waters of the stream or river. The fact that both the voice of 8:16 and the Man of 12:6 were by or near a river seems to suggest that they are one and the same Being, e.g. the voice which Daniel heard came from the Man whom he would later see clothed in linen. If this is so then this Entity clearly has authority over Gabriel, an angel who stands in the very presence of God himself!

“The angel answered, ‘I am Gabriel. **_I stand in the presence of God_** , and I have been sent to speak to you and to tell you this good news.’” Luke 1:19

However, these are not the main reasons which lead us to believe that this specific Being was not a mere created messenger like Gabriel or Michael. The one particular factor that strongly points to this Entity being immeasurably superior to both Gabriel and Michael is his appearance. The way Daniel describes this unnamed Messenger strongly suggests that this was a theophany (an appearance of God), or perhaps a Christophany (an OT appearance of the prehuman Christ). 

For example, even though linen is the clothing worn by both humans and angels who perform priestly duties (cf. Exodus 28:42; Leviticus 6:10, 16:4; Ezekiel 9:2-3, 11; 10:2, 6-7, 44:17; Revelation 15:5-6), the appearance of this particular Being is similar to the way the OT describes Yahweh’s visible form or glory,

“As I looked, thrones were placed, **_and the Ancient of Days took his seat_** ; his clothing was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool; **_his throne was fiery flames; its wheels were burning fire. A stream of fire issued and came out from before him_** ; a thousand thousands served him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the court sat in judgment, and the books were opened.” Daniel 7:9-10

And:

“As I looked, behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, and a great cloud, with brightness round about it, and fire flashing forth continually, and in the midst of the fire, as it were gleaming bronze. And from the midst of it came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they had the form of men, but each had four faces, and each of them had four wings. Their legs were straight, and the soles of their feet were like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like burnished bronze. Under their wings on their four sides they had human hands. And the four had their faces and their wings thus: their wings touched one another; they went every one straight forward, without turning as they went. As for the likeness of their faces, each had the face of a man in front; the four had the face of a lion on the right side, the four had the face of an ox on the left side, and the four had the face of an eagle at the back. Such were their faces. And their wings were spread out above; each creature had two wings, each of which touched the wing of another, while two covered their bodies. And each went straight forward; wherever the spirit would go, they went, without turning as they went. In the midst of the living creatures there was something that looked like burning coals of fire, like torches moving to and fro among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. And the living creatures darted to and fro, like a flash of lightning. Now as I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel upon the earth beside the living creatures, one for each of the four of them. **_As for the appearance of the wheels and their construction: their appearance was like the gleaming of a chrysolite_** ; and the four had the same likeness, their construction being as it were a wheel within a wheel… Over the heads of the living creatures there was the likeness of a firmament, shining like crystal, spread out above their heads. And under the firmament their wings were stretched out straight, one toward another; and each creature had two wings covering its body. And when they went, **_I heard the sound of their wings like the sound of many waters, like the thunder of the Almighty, a sound of tumult like the sound of a host_** ; when they stood still, they let down their wings. And there came a voice from above the firmament/expanse over their heads; when they stood still, they let down their wings. Above the expanse over their heads **_was what looked like a throne of sapphire, and high above on the throne _was a figure like that of a man_. I saw that from what appeared to be his waist up he looked like glowing metal, as if full of fire, and that from there down he looked like fire; and brilliant light surrounded him. Like the appearance of a rainbow in the clouds on a rainy day, so was the radiance around him. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD_**. When I saw it, I fell facedown, and I heard the voice of one speaking. He said to me, ‘Son of man, stand up on your feet and I will speak to you.’ As he spoke, the Spirit came into me and raised me to my feet, and I heard him speaking to me. He said: ‘Son of man, I am sending you to the Israelites, to a rebellious nation that has rebelled against me; they and their fathers have been in revolt against me to this very day. The people to whom I am sending you are obstinate and stubborn. Say to them, “This is what the Sovereign LORD says.” And whether they listen or fail to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will know that a prophet has been among them. And you, son of man, do not be afraid of them or their words. Do not be afraid, though briers and thorns are all around you and you live among scorpions. Do not be afraid of what they say or terrified by them, though they are a rebellious house. You must speak my words to them, whether they listen or fail to listen, for they are rebellious. But you, son of man, listen to what I say to you. Do not rebel like that rebellious house; open your mouth and eat what I give you.’” Ezekiel 1:4-16, 22-28, 2:1-8

“In the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, with the elders of Judah sitting before me, **__the hand of the Lord GOD fell there upon me_. Then I beheld, and, lo, a form that had the appearance of a man; below what appeared to be his loins it was fire, and above his loins it was like the appearance of brightness, like gleaming bronze. _He put forth the form of a hand_ , and took me by a lock of my head; and the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven, and brought me in visions of God to Jerusalem_**, to the entrance of the gateway of the inner court that faces north, where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy. And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the vision that I saw in the plain.” Ezekiel 8:1-4

His appearance is also similar to the mighty Angel that John saw in Revelation:

“Then I saw **_another _mighty_ angel (allon angelon _ischyron_)_** coming down from heaven. **__He was robed in a cloud_ , with a rainbow above his head; his face was like the sun, and _his legs were like fiery pillars_. He was holding a little scroll, which lay open in his hand. He planted his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land, and he gave a loud shout like the roar of a lion_**. When he shouted, the voices of the seven thunders spoke. And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say, ‘Seal up what the seven thunders have said and do not write it down.’ Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land **__raised his right hand to heaven. And he swore by him who lives for ever and ever_ , who created the heavens and all that is in them, the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it_**, and said, ‘There will be no more delay! But in the days when the seventh angel is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of God will be accomplished, just as he announced to his servants the prophets.’” Revelation 10:1-7

Not only is the depiction of this particular Messenger strikingly reminiscent of the man of Daniel but like the figure in Daniel this mighty Angel swears by the One who lives forever. 

This may suggest that the Being of Daniel is a creature since his appearance is similar to that of an Angel. However, the Angel that John saw wasn’t a created being but the Divine Messenger of God/Yahweh of the OT, the One who was often indistinguishable from Yahweh. 

The reason we know that John has this particular Divine Agent in view is because of his statements that the latter was robed in a cloud and had feet like fiery pillars. These are clear allusions to the Exodus where we read that Yahweh’s Angel was in a cloud guiding the Israelites:

“** _Then _the Angel of God_ , who had been traveling _in front_ of Israel's army, _withdrew and went behind them. The pillar of cloud_ also moved from _in front and stood behind them__** , coming between the armies of Egypt and Israel. Throughout the night the cloud brought darkness to the one side and light to the other side; so neither went near the other all night long.” Exodus 14:19-20

Notice that the cloud moved when the Angel did, suggesting that the Angel was controlling its course. Moreover, the pillar of cloud would become a pillar of fire at night:

“During the last watch of the night **_the LORD looked down from _the pillar of fire__** and cloud at the Egyptian army and threw it into confusion.” Exodus 14:24

"By day **_the LORD went ahead of them in _a pillar of cloud__** to guide them on their way and by night **_in _a pillar of fire__** to give them light, so that they could travel by day or night. Neither the pillar of cloud by day nor the pillar of fire by night left its place in front of the people. Exodus 13:21-22

Amazingly, the above passages claim that Yahweh was inside the cloud directing it, even though we were told earlier that it was the Angel who was guiding it! Nor are these the only texts that say that Yahweh would appear and descend in the cloud in full view of the people:

“Now Moses used to take a tent and pitch it outside the camp some distance away, calling it the ‘tent of meeting.’ Anyone inquiring of the LORD would go to the tent of meeting outside the camp. And whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose and stood at the entrances to their tents, watching Moses until he entered the tent. As Moses went into the tent, **_the pillar of cloud would come down and stay at the entrance_** , while the LORD spoke with Moses. Whenever the people saw **_the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance to the tent_** , they all stood and worshiped, each at the entrance to his tent. The LORD would speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend. Then Moses would return to the camp, but his young aide Joshua son of Nun did not leave the tent.” Exodus 33:7-11

“The cloud of the LORD was over them by day when they set out from the camp.” Numbers 10:34

In fact, the OT repeatedly says that Yahweh rides the clouds of heaven since they are his chariots:

“Now this is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death. He said, ‘The LORD came from Sinai, and dawned on them from Seir; he shone forth from Mount Paran, **_And he came from the midst of ten thousand holy ones_** ; at his right hand there was flashing lightning for them… There is no one like the God of Jeshurun, who rides on the heavens to help you **_and on the clouds in his majesty_**. The eternal God is your refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He will drive out your enemy before you, saying, “Destroy him!”’” Deuteronomy 33:1-2, 26-27

“He mounted the cherubim and flew; he soared on the wings of the wind. He made darkness his covering, his canopy around him — **_the dark rain clouds of the sky_**.” Psalm 18:10-11

“Sing to God, sing praise to his name, extol him **_who rides on the clouds_** — his name is the LORD — and rejoice before him… **_The chariots of God are tens of thousands and thousands of thousands_** ; the Lord has come from Sinai into his sanctuary… **_to him who rides the ancient skies above_** , who thunders with mighty voice. Proclaim the power of God, whose majesty is over Israel, whose power is in the skies.” Psalm 68:4, 17, 33-34

“and lays the beams of his upper chambers on their waters. **_He makes the clouds his chariot_** and rides on the wings of the wind.” Psalm 104:3

“An oracle concerning Egypt: **_See, the LORD rides on a swift cloud_** and is coming to Egypt. The idols of Egypt tremble before him, and the hearts of the Egyptians melt within them.” Isaiah 19:1

Thus, since the Angel rides the cloud, much like Yahweh does, this strongly supports his Deity. In fact, God himself told Moses that this particular Messenger has God’s very own Name within him, meaning that the Angel bears the Divine nature, and can forgive sins which is an exclusively Divine prerogative (cf. Isaiah 43:25; Micah 7:18-19; Mark 2:7):

“See, I am sending an Angel ahead of you to guard you along the way and to bring you to the place I have prepared. Pay attention to him and listen to what he says. Do not rebel against him; **_he will not forgive your rebellion, since my Name is in him_**. If you listen carefully to what he says and do all that I say, I will be an enemy to your enemies and will oppose those who oppose you. My angel will go ahead of you and bring you into the land of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hivites and Jebusites, and I will wipe them out.” Exodus 23:20-23

Here is an example of the Angel forgiving someone’s sins:

“Then he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before **_the Angel of the LORD_** , and Satan standing at his right side to accuse him. The LORD said to Satan, ‘The LORD rebuke you, Satan! The LORD, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke you! Is not this man a burning stick snatched from the fire?’ Now Joshua was dressed in filthy clothes as he stood before **_the Angel_**. **_The Angel_** said to those who were standing before him, ‘Take off his filthy clothes.’ Then he [the Angel] said to Joshua, ‘** _See, I have taken away your sin, and I will put rich garments on you_**.’” Zechariah 3:1-4

Even the patriarch Jacob prayed to this Angel who had delivered him all his life to bless his grandchildren:

“And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it upon the head of E'phraim, who was the younger, and his left hand upon the head of Manas'seh, crossing his hands, for Manas'seh was the firstborn. And he blessed Joseph, and said, ‘The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who has led me all my life long to this day, **_the Angel who has delivered me from all evil, may he bless (y'barech) the lads_** ; and in them let my name be perpetuated, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.’” Genesis 48:14-16

Jacob’s blessing is truly amazing since he uses the singular verb, “may He bless,” as opposed to the plural (_yib'r'chu_) even though he prays to both God and the Angel! The use of the singular here indicates that Jacob knew that God and his Angel were somehow connected even though they were personally distinct. 

Moreover, just as the Angel came to the aid of Jacob this Divine Being also comes to deliver all those who fear him:

“This poor man cried, and the LORD heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. **_The Angel of the LORD encamps around those who fear him, and delivers them_**.” Psalm 34:6-7

It may have also been this same Divine Angel who came to the rescue of Daniel and his three friends:

“And he ordered certain mighty men of his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace. Then these men were bound in their mantles, their tunics, their hats, and their other garments, and they were cast into the burning fiery furnace. Because the king's order was strict and the furnace very hot, the flame of the fire slew those men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego. And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego, fell bound into the burning fiery furnace. Then King Nebuchadnez'zar was astonished and rose up in haste. He said to his counselors, ‘Did we not cast three men bound into the fire?’ They answered the king, ‘True, O king.’ He answered, ‘But I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they are not hurt; **_and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods_**.’ Then Nebuchadnez'zar came near to the door of the burning fiery furnace and said, ‘Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego, servants of the Most High God, come forth, and come here!’ Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego came out from the fire. And the satraps, the prefects, the governors, and the king's counselors gathered together and saw that the fire had not had any power over the bodies of those men; the hair of their heads was not singed, their mantles were not harmed, and no smell of fire had come upon them. Nebuchadnez'zar said, ‘Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed'nego, **_who has sent his Angel and delivered his servants_** , who trusted in him, and set at nought the king's command, and yielded up their bodies rather than serve and worship any god except their own God.’” Daniel 3:20-28

And:

“Then the king commanded, and Daniel was brought and cast into the den of lions. The king said to Daniel, ‘May your God, whom you serve continually, deliver you!’ And a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet and with the signet of his lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. Then the king went to his palace, and spent the night fasting; no diversions were brought to him, and sleep fled from him. Then, at break of day, the king arose and went in haste to the den of lions. When he came near to the den where Daniel was, he cried out in a tone of anguish and said to Daniel, ‘O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?’ Then Daniel said to the king, ‘O king, live for ever! **_My God sent his Angel and shut the lions' mouths_** , and they have not hurt me, because I was found blameless before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no wrong.’” Daniel 6:16-22

And in the case that someone wishes to argue that the Angel in Revelation 10 could not be this same Divine Messenger since he the former is described as being mighty, but not the Almighty, notice what John says of God:

“Therefore in one day her plagues will overtake her: death, mourning and famine. She will be consumed by fire, **_for _mighty_ (ischyros) is the Lord God who judges her_**.” Revelation 18:8

The OT itself calls Yahweh mighty:

“And it shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of Israel shall no more join themselves with, and the saved of Jacob shall no more trust in them that injured them; but they shall trust in the Holy God of Israel, in truth. And the remnant of Jacob shall trust in **_the mighty God (theon ischyonta)_**.” Isaiah 10:20-21 LXX

Thus, the Angel is mighty like God! What an amazing Angel indeed!**(1)**

Hence, the similarity between the Man’s depiction in Daniel 10 and the Angel’s description in Revelation 10 suggests that they are one and the same Being. If so then Daniel saw the OT Angel of Yahweh/God, the One who is both distinct from and identical to God Almighty! 

All of these factors, i.e. the Man’s superior status to Gabriel and Michael, the theophanic language used to describe him, and the frightened human reaction to his presence, especially when no such reaction came with respect to Gabriel, strongly support the view that the man dressed in linen whom Daniel saw was a fully Divine Being. 

  
**A Preincarnate Appearance of Christ?**

The evidence also seems to indicate that the Man in Daniel 10 may have actually been an OT appearance of the prehuman Christ. In the book of Revelation John describes Jesus in much the same way that Daniel depicted this Being and John’s reaction upon seeing the exalted Christ is similar to the way Daniel reacted:

“I turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. And when I turned I saw seven golden lampstands, and among the lampstands was someone ‘** _like a Son of Man_** ,’ dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet **_and with a golden sash around his chest. His head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were like blazing fire. His feet were like bronze glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters_**. In his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance. **_When I saw him,_I fell at his feet as though dead_. Then he placed his right hand on me_** and said: ‘Do not be afraid. **_I am the First and the Last_**. I am the Living One; I was dead, **_and behold I am alive for ever and ever_**! And I hold the keys of death and Hades.’” Revelation 1:12-18

And:

“And to the angel of the church in Thyatira write: The Son of God, **_who has eyes like a flame of fire, and His feet are like burnished bronze_** , says this:” Revelation 2:18

In these specific passages John depicts Jesus as the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man of Daniel 7, as well as the Being of Daniel 10 and 12. 

In presenting Jesus as both the Son of Man and the Man dressed in linen, John may be suggesting that these two exalted figures from the book of Daniel are actually one and the same Divine Person. If this is the case then this may further imply that John believed that Christ appeared to Daniel not only as the Son of Man but as the Man clothed in linen as well. 

This is not the only place where John describes Jesus as the Danielic Son of Man:

“Look, **_he is coming with the clouds_** , and every eye will see him, even those **_who pierced him_** ; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn because of him. So shall it be! Amen." Revelation 1:7

“I looked, and there before me **_was a white cloud,_and seated on the cloud was one ‘like a Son of Man’_ with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand_**. Then another angel came out of the temple and called in a loud voice **_to him who was sitting on the cloud_** , ‘Take your sickle and reap, because the time to reap has come, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.’ **_So he who was seated on the cloud_** swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested. Revelation 14:14-16

The importance of this identification can be seen by reading what Daniel wrote concerning this specific Son of Man:

“In my vision at night I looked, and there before me **_was one _like a Son of Man_ , coming with the clouds of heaven_**. He approached the Ancient of Days and was led into his presence. He was given authority, glory and sovereign power; all peoples, nations and men of every language worshiped him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that will not pass away, and his kingdom is one that will never be destroyed.” Daniel 7:13-14

Like God and his Divine Angel, the Son of Man rides the clouds. And like God, the Son of Man reigns forever and is worshiped by all creation:

“Then the sovereignty, power and greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven will be handed over to the saints, the people of **_the Most High. His kingdom will be an everlasting kingdom, and all rulers will worship and obey him_**.” Daniel 7:27

“‘In that day,’ declares the LORD, ‘I will gather the lame; I will assemble the exiles and those I have brought to grief. I will make the lame a remnant, those driven away a strong nation. **_The LORD will rule over them in Mount Zion from that day and forever_**.’” Micah 4:6-7

John also portrays the risen and exalted Christ as the human appearance of the glory of Yahweh mentioned in Ezekiel 1-2, 8 and 43. He further identifies the Risen Lord as the One who lives forever and ever as well as the First and the Last of the inspired book of Isaiah:

“Thus says the LORD, Israel's King and His Redeemer, the LORD of hosts: I am the First and I am the Last; apart from me there is no God.” Isaiah 44:6

“Listen to me, O Jacob, Israel, whom I have called: I AM he; I am the First and I am the Last.” Isaiah 48:12

To say that this is truly amazing as well as shocking would be a wild understatement! 

  
**What the NT says concerning OT appearances of Christ**

The NT authors believed that the Lord Jesus was active throughout the entire OT period. For instance, the blessed Apostle Paul wrote that Christ was the spiritual Rock who delivered and provided for Moses and the Israelites during the Exodus, and that he is the One who the people tested:

“For I want you to know, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and all ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink. **_For they drank from the spiritual Rock that followed them,_and the Rock was Christ__**. Nevertheless, with most of them God was not pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things took place as examples for us, that we might not desire evil as they did. Do not be idolaters as some of them were; as it is written, ‘The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play.’ We must not indulge in sexual immorality as some of them did, and twenty-three thousand fell in a single day. **_We must not put _Christ_ to the test, _as some of them did_ and were destroyed by serpents_**, nor grumble, as some of them did and were destroyed by the Destroyer.” 1 Corinthians 10:1-10

Yet according to the OT writings Yahweh was the Rock who guided and provided for Israel:

“I will proclaim the name of the LORD. Oh, praise the greatness of our God! **_He is the Rock_** , his works are perfect, and all his ways are just. A faithful God who does no wrong, upright and just is he… **_The LORD ALONE led him_** ; no foreign god was with him. He made him ride on the heights of the land **_and fed him with the fruit of the fields. He nourished him with honey from the rock, and with oil from the flinty crag, with curds and milk from herd and flock and with fattened lambs and goats, with choice rams of Bashan and the finest kernels of wheat. You drank the foaming blood of the grape_**. Jeshurun grew fat and kicked; **_filled with food_** , he became heavy and sleek. He abandoned the God who made him and rejected **_the Rock his Savior_** … You deserted **_the Rock_** , who fathered you; you forgot the God who gave you birth… If only they were wise and would understand this and discern what their end will be! How could one man chase a thousand, or two put ten thousand to flight, unless **_their Rock_** had sold them, unless the LORD had given them up? For their rock is not like **_our Rock_** , as even our enemies concede.” Deuteronomy 32:3-4, 12-15, 18, 29-31

And he is the Lord who was put to the test:

“From Mount Hor they set out by the way to the Red Sea, to go around the land of Edom. And the people became impatient on the way. And the people spoke against God and against Moses, ‘Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no food and no water, and we loathe this worthless food.’ Then the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people, so that many people of Israel died. And the people came to Moses and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD and against you. Pray to the LORD, that he take away the serpents from us.’ So Moses prayed for the people. And the LORD said to Moses, ‘Make a fiery serpent and set it on a pole, and everyone who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live.’ So Moses made a bronze serpent and set it on a pole. And if a serpent bit anyone, he would look at the bronze serpent and live.” Numbers 21:4-9

The NET Bible’s textual critical note is worth citing since it brings out the implication of Paul’s words more clearly:

tc _Χριστόν (Criston, “Christ”) is attested in the majority of mss, including many important witnesses of the Alexandrian (Ì 46 1739 1881) and Western (D F G) text types, and other mss and versions (Ψ latt sy co)_. On the other hand, some of the important Alexandrian witnesses have κύριον (kurion, “Lord”; א B C P 33 104 1175 _al_). A few mss (A 81 _pc_) have θεόν (qeon, “God”). The _nomina sacra_ for these readings are quite similar (cMn, kMn, and qMn respectively), so one might be able to account for the different readings by way of confusion. On closer examination, the variants appear to be intentional changes. _Alexandrian scribes replaced the highly specific term “Christ” with the less specific terms “Lord” and “God” because in the context it seems to be anachronistic to speak of the exodus generation putting _Christ_ to the test. If the original had been “Lord,” it seems unlikely that a scribe would have willingly created a difficulty by substituting the more specific “Christ_.” Moreover, even if not motivated by a tendency to overcorrect, a scribe might be likely to assimilate the word “Christ” to “Lord” in conformity with Deut 6:16 or other passages. _The evidence from the early church regarding the reading of this verse is rather COMPELLING in favor of “Christ_.” Marcion, a second-century, anti-Jewish heretic, would naturally have opposed any reference to Christ in historical involvement with Israel, because he thought of the Creator God of the OT as inherently evil. _In spite of this strong prejudice, though, {Marcion} read a text with “Christ.” Other early church writers attest to the presence of the word “Christ,” including {Clement of Alexandria} and Origen. What is more, the synod of Antioch in a.d. 268 used the reading “Christ” as evidence of the preexistence of Christ when it condemned Paul of Samosata_. (See G. Zuntz, _The Text of the Epistles_ , 126-27; _TCGNT_ 494; C. D. Osburn, “The Text of 1 Corinthians 10:9,” _New Testament Textual Criticism: Its Significance for Exegesis_ , 201-11; _contra_ A. Robertson and A. Plummer, _First Corinthians_ [ICC], 205-6.) _Since “Christ” is the more difficult reading on all accounts, it is almost certainly original_. In addition, “Christ” is consistent with Paul’s style in this passage (cf. 10:4, a text in which {Marcion} also reads “Christ”). _This text is also christologically significant, since the reading “Christ” makes an explicit claim to the preexistence of Christ_. (The textual critic faces a similar dilemma in Jude 5. In a similar exodus context, some of the more important Alexandrian mss [A B 33 81 _pc_] and the Vulgate read “Jesus” in place of “Lord.” Two of those mss [A 81] are the same mss that have “Christ” instead of “God” in 1 Cor 10:9. See the **tc** notes on Jude 5 for more information.) _In sum, “Christ” has all the earmarks of authenticity here and should be considered the original reading_. ([NET Bible](<http://net.bible.org/bible.php?book=1Co&chapter=10#n6> "Opens external link in new window"); capital and underline emphasis ours)

The following inspired NT writer agrees with Paul that it was the Lord Jesus who saved Israel out of Egypt**(2)** and subsequently punished them for their rebellion, as well as being the One who destroyed Sodom and Gommorah by fire**(3)** :

“For certain men whose condemnation was written about long ago have secretly slipped in among you. They are godless men, who change the grace of our God into a license for immorality and deny **_Jesus Christ our ONLY Sovereign and Lord_ (_ton monon despoten kai kyrion hemon)_**. Though you already know all this, I want to remind you **_that _Jesus_ delivered _his people_ out of Egypt, but later destroyed those who did not believe_**. And the angels who did not stay within their own position of authority, but left their proper dwelling, **_HE [Jesus] has kept in eternal chains_** under gloomy darkness until the judgment of the great day — just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding cities, which likewise indulged in sexual immorality and pursued unnatural desire, serve as an example by undergoing a punishment of eternal fire.” Jude 1:4-7

Again, here are the NET Bible’s text critical notes:

tc ‡ The reading Ιησοvς (Iesous, “Jesus”) is deemed too hard by several scholars, since it involves the notion of Jesus acting in the early history of the nation Israel. _However, not only does this reading enjoy the strongest support from a variety of early witnesses (e.g., A B 33 81 1241 1739 1881 2344 _pc_ vg co Or1739mg), but the plethora of variants demonstrate that scribes were uncomfortable with it_, for they seemed to exchange κύριος (kurios, “Lord”) or θεός (theos, “God”) for Ιησοvς (though Ì72 has the intriguing reading θεός Χριστός [qeos Cristos, “God Christ”] for Ιησοvς). _In addition to the evidence supplied in NA 27 for this reading, note also {88 322 323 424c 665 915 2298 eth Cyr Hier Bede}_. As difficult as the reading Ιησοvς is, in light of v. 4 and in light of the progress of revelation (Jude being one of the last books in the NT to be composed), _it is wholly appropriate_. ([*](<http://net.bible.org/bible.php?book=Jud&chapter=1#n24> "Opens external link in new window"))

Seeing that the NT writers believed that Jesus appeared and was active all throughout the OT it shouldn’t surprise us to find such appearances recorded in Biblical books such as Daniel. In fact this is what we would expect to find if the NT is correct concerning Jesus showing up during OT times. 

  
**Summation of the Biblical Data**

Let us summarize what we have discovered thus far.

  * The description of the Being dressed in linen whom Daniel saw (cf. 10:5-6, 12:5-7) is similar to the way Yahweh and the Ancient of Days (who happens to be Yahweh [specifically the Father]) are described in passages such as Daniel 7:9-10, Ezekiel 1-2, 43 etc.
  * His appearance is also similar to the depiction of the Mighty Angel of Revelation 10.
  * The context of Revelation 10 shows that John was seeing the OT Angel of Yahweh/God, the One who is both distinct from and identical to God and who was responsible for leading Israel in the cloud during the Exodus.
  * This suggests that Daniel was also seeing the Angel of Yahweh, and therefore encountered a fully Divine Being.
  * According to Revelation, Jesus has the same appearance of this Divine Being dressed in linen. Jesus is also described as the Ancient of Days and the Son of Man mentioned in Daniel 7:9-10 and 13-14.
  * Daniel’s Son Man, like God and his Divine Angel, rides the clouds. And like God, this human figure rules forever and is worshiped by every creature.
  * Since Christ is portrayed as both the Man in linen and the Son of Man this suggests that these two entities are actually one and the same Divine Person, being OT appearances of the Lord Jesus.
  * Therefore, according to the inspired Christian Greek Scriptures, Jesus is the Angel of God/Yahweh, the Man dressed in linen, and the Son of Man that rides the clouds and who is worshiped by the entire creation which he rules forever. 


As we come to the conclusion of our discussion we do want to emphasize one specific point. Our explanation that the Man in linen whom Daniel saw was the prehuman Christ may turn out to be wrong and therefore we cannot be dogmatic about this interpretation. Yet even if we happen to be mistaken the fact remains that the inspired NT writings, specifically Revelation, present Jesus as a fully Divine Being and describe his Divine form and post-resurrected appearance in the same way that God and certain heavenly messengers are depicted. 

Thus, according to the inspired NT documents Jesus is a preexistent Divine Person, being fully God in essence, who takes on various forms and functions, such as assuming the appearance and role of an angelic being. The reason why Jesus would appear in such a form is to denote his function as a Messenger (which is what an angel literally is according to the Holy Bible) from God (the Father) sent down from heaven to proclaim and save. 

  
**Endnotes**

**(1)** This is similar to the statements found in Isaiah where both God and the Messianic King are called the Mighty God:

“For to us _**a child is born**_ , to us a son is given; and the government will be upon his shoulder, and his name will be called ‘Wonderful Counselor, _**Mighty God**_ , Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.’ Of the increase of his government and of peace there will be no end, upon the throne of David, and over his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from this time forth and for evermore. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this.” Isaiah 9:6-7

And, once again, here is Isaiah 10:20-21:

“In that day the remnant of Israel and the survivors of the house of Jacob will no more lean upon him that smote them, but will lean upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to **_the Mighty God_**.”

**(2)** Jude’s comment that Jesus saved his people out Egypt echoes what Matthew wrote in his inspired Gospel:

“She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, _**for he will save his people from their sins**_.’” Matthew 1:21

Hence, since Jesus was the One who came down to deliver his people from bondage to Pharaoh it shouldn’t come as a surprise that he would be the One to come to deliver his people from their bondage to sin! 

**(3)** The example of Sodom and Gomorrah is rather interesting when we consider that Genesis, where this story appears, speaks of two Yahwehs or more specifically two distinct Persons of Yahweh, One on earth in the form of a man and the Other in heaven who rained down fire upon these cities:

“** _And the LORD appeared to him_** by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat at the door of his tent in the heat of the day. He lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold, **_three men stood in front of him_**. When he saw them, he ran from the tent door to meet them, and bowed himself to the earth, and said, ‘My lord, if I have found favor in your sight, do not pass by your servant. Let a little water be brought, **_and wash your feet_** , and rest yourselves under the tree, while I fetch a morsel of bread, that you may refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on -- since you have come to your servant.’ So they said, ‘Do as you have said.’ And Abraham hastened into the tent to Sarah, and said, "Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes.’ And Abraham ran to the herd, and took a calf, tender and good, and gave it to the servant, who hastened to prepare it. Then he took curds, and milk, and the calf which he had prepared, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree **_while they ate_**. They said to him, ‘Where is Sarah your wife?" And he said, ‘She is in the tent.’ **_The LORD said_** , ‘I will surely return to you in the spring, and Sarah your wife shall have a son.’ And Sarah was listening at the tent door behind him… Then the men set out from there, and they looked toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to set them on their way. The LORD said, ‘Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, seeing that Abraham shall become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall bless themselves by him? No, for I have chosen him, that he may charge his children and his household after him to keep the way of the LORD by doing righteousness and justice; so that the LORD may bring to Abraham what he has promised him.’ Then **_the LORD said_** , ‘Because the outcry against Sodom and Gomor'rah is great and their sin is very grave, **_I will go down_** to see whether they have done altogether according to the outcry which has come to me; and if not, I will know.’ So the men turned from there, and went toward Sodom; **_but Abraham still stood before the LORD_** … Far be it from you to do such a thing, to slay the righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous fare as the wicked! Far be that from you! **_Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right_**?’… **_And the LORD went his way_** , when he had finished speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place… Then **__the LORD rained__** on Sodom and Gomorrah sulfur and fire **__from the LORD out of heaven__**.” Genesis 18-10, 16-22, 25, 33, 19:24

The mention of two Yahwehs may explain why in certain Biblical passages Yahweh refers to God destroying these cities in the third person:

“Behold, **_I_** am stirring up the Medes against them, who have no regard for silver and do not delight in gold. Their bows will slaughter the young men; they will have no mercy on the fruit of the womb; their eyes will not pity children. And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the splendor and pride of the Chalde'ans, will be like Sodom and Gomorrah when **_God_** overthrew them.” Isaiah 13:17-19

“As when **_God_** overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighboring cities, **_declares the LORD_** , so no man shall dwell there, and no son of man shall sojourn in her.” Jeremiah 50:40

“‘** _I_** overthrew some of you, as when **_God_** overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were as a brand plucked out of the burning; yet you did not return to me,’ **_declares the LORD_**.” Amos 4:11

This use of the third person provides further corroboration that Genesis 19:24 refers to two distinct Persons of Yahweh, One on earth and the Other in heaven; at the very least these specific OT examples indicate that this is how the passage in Genesis was understood by some (many?) of the Israelites. 

For more on the Trinitarian interpretation and implication of Genesis 19:24 we highly recommend Anthony Roger’s article, [The “Heavenly” and “Earthly” Yahweh: A Trinitarian Interpretation of Genesis 19:24](https://answeringislam.info/?id=690). 

**Appendix A –**

**What the Biblical Expositors Have to Say**

In this section we provide the explanations of several Biblical commentators in order to avoid the charge that our interpretation concerning the Man of Daniel 10 being a theophany, or more specifically a Christophany, and that he was different from the interpreting angel who spoke with the prophet, is novel and cuts against the traditional, conservative Christian understanding. The comments of the following Bible expositors will demonstrate that our position is not something new or made up since respectable Christian scholars uphold this view. 

We begin by referencing conservative Biblical scholar John F. Walvoord’s exegesis of Daniel:

“In this situation, Daniel records that he had a vision of a glorious man. Daniel describes the man as clothed in linen, his loins girded with fine gold, his body having an appearance of lightning, his eyes flaming torches, his arms and feet like polished brass, and his voice sounded like the words of a multitude. All commentators agree that the personage was not a man, but either a glorious angel or a theophany, that is, an appearance of God Himself.

“Leupold, after considerable discussion, concludes that the personage is a mighty angel on the fact that he requires the help of Michael mentioned in verse 13, which would not be true of deity. If an angel, it may have been Gabriel, who appeared to Daniel in chapter 8. However, Leupold prefers to identify him with an unknown angel of equal stature with Michael. Young notes that Hengstenberg identified him as Michael and that the Jews considered the figure an angel.

“Although there is room for debate even among conservative scholars, _the evidence seems more in favor of considering this a theophany. In this case, the man of 10:5-6 is to be distinguished from the angel of 10:10-14 as well as Michael mentioned in 10:13_. Although mighty angels are frequently difficult to distinguish from God Himself, as in other visions such as those in Ezekiel and Revelation, the similarity between the man described in 10:5-6 and the glorified Christ in Revelation 1:13-15 has led conservative expositors such as Young and Keil to consider the man a genuine theophany or an appearance of Christ as the Angel of Jehovah.” (Walvoord, _Daniel – The Key to Prophetic Revelation_[Moody Press, Chicago, Paperback edition 1989], pp. 242-243: [*](<http://www.bible.org/page.php?page_id=5661> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

Another conservative Christian expositor asks,

“Who was this person? The majority of scholars identify him simply as the angel sent to deliver the message to Daniel. Montgomery has suggested that this interpreting angel was Gabriel, who appeared to Daniel previously (cf. 8:16; 9:21). _Yet Lacocque cogently argues that this being could not have been Gabriel, for when Daniel met that angel in 9:21, he was not afraid whereas here he was overcome with fear and had to be revived three times_.

“On the other hand, some have identified the ‘man dressed in linen’ _as none other than God himself, probably in the person of the divine Messiah (see comments on 3:25_). That this person was God seems to be the correct view not only because of the overwhelming effect of his presence on Daniel _but because of the similar description of the theophany presented in Ezek 1:26-28 and the even closer parallel to the portrait of Christ in Rev 1:12-16_. In 12:6 this ‘man in linen’ also seems to have had knowledge that transcended that of the other angels, and in 12:7 he took a divine oath.

“An argument commonly raised against the equation of this person with deity is that the angel described in vv. 10-14 was clearly inferior to God. For example, this angel was ‘sent’ to Daniel (v. 11) and required Michael’s help to fight against other angelic forces (v. 13). _G. C. Luck offered the proper solution to this problem, which is that the ‘man dressed in linen’ and the interpreting angel introduced in v. 10 are distinct personalities_. At least four holy angels (the interpreting angel [10:10-14 and throughout chaps. 10-12]; Michael [10:13,21]; and two others [12:5]) appear in this vision, and the ‘man dressed in linen’ is unquestionably in charge (cf. 12:6-7). Therefore the personage introduced in 10:5-6 is a theophany, but the contents of the vision are related by the interpreting angel, who is introduced at v. 10. In the book of Revelation there is a similar pattern. On occasion John encountered Christ himself (e.g., 1:12-20), whereas at other times he was instructed by an angel (e.g., 17:1-6).” (_The New American Commentary An Exegetical and Theological Exposition of Holy Scripture – Daniel_ , Stephen R. Miller [Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1994], Volume 18, pp. 281-282)

And:

“At this pointing in the narrative ‘ _the man clothed in linen’ (Christ) is reintroduced_. He is described as standing in midair ‘above the waters of the river.’ Daniel was a witness to a striking scene. Two angels were on either bank of the river, the interpreting angel evidently was still standing before him, _and the Lord was exalted above them all_.

“Gabriel now addresses a question to ‘the man clothed in linen.’ _The fact that knowledge is requested from the man in white suggests his superiority over the angels_ , and Whitcomb thinks his position ‘above the waters of the river’ indicates ‘his supernatural authority and power.’ … (Pp. 322-323; underline emphasis ours)

The late renowned Bible exegete John Gill’s lengthy explanation of Daniel 10 and 12 is worth quoting here:

**_Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked_** … Being excited to it, by an object presented, of an unusual appearance, which engaged his attention, and caused him to look wistly at it: **_and, behold a certain man clothed in linen_** ; _not Gabriel, but the Son of God, the Messiah_ ; who, though not as yet incarnate, yet was so in the counsel and purpose of God; had agreed in covenant to be man, was promised and prophesied of as such; _and now appeared in a human form, as he frequently did before his incarnation_ , as a pledge of it, and showing his readiness to assume human nature: he appears here "clothed in linen", in the habit of a priest; which office he sustains, and executes by the sacrifice of himself, and by his prevalent intercession; and may denote his purity and innocence, as well as direct us to his spotless righteousness he is the author of, which is like fine linen, clean and white, (Revelation 19:8): **_whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz_** ; or of Fez, which is the best gold. Some take it to be the same with the gold of Ophir, often spoken of in Scripture; so the Targum on (Jeremiah 10:9), renders Uphaz by Ophir. Ptolemy makes mention of a river called Phasis in the island of Taprobane or Zeilan, where Bochart seems to think Ophir was, from whence the gold of that name came; and the same geographer. ([_The New John Gill Exposition of the Entire Bible_](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=010&verse=005> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

**_And, behold, an hand touched me_** … _Not the hand of the man clothed with linen, whose voice he heard, and whose hand was like polished brass_ , (Daniel 10:6), _but the hand of one distinct from him, one of his attendants_ , (Daniel 12:5,6) _that had the similitude of the sons of men_ , (Daniel 10:16), and whose hand was softer, and nearer a human one; _very probably the hand of the Angel Gabriel in human form_ , who had touched him before, when in the like circumstances, (Daniel 8:16,18)… ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=010&verse=010> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

**_Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two_** …  
Other two angels, besides the man clothed with linen, (Daniel 12:6) or rather besides the angel who had given Daniel the long account of things that were to come to pass, in the preceding chapter, and the beginning of this; whom Daniel, being attentive to that account, had not observed before; but now, that being finished, he looks about him, and takes notice of those other two who were standing, _being ministering spirits to Christ_ , and ready to execute his orders: **_the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river_** ; Hiddekel or Tigris, as appears from (Daniel 10:4). The reason of this position was chiefly _on account of Christ, the man clothed with linen, who stood upon or above the water of the river, in the midst of it_ ; and to show that they were waiting upon him, and ready to go every way he should send them to do his will; and also on account of Daniel, that he might hear what was said, whether to Christ, or to one another; since, being at such a distance, their voice must be loud; and indeed the design of all that follows to the end of the chapter is to inform him, and by him the church and people of God in all future ages, of the time and end of all these things before delivered in the prophecy. ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=012&verse=005> "Opens external link in new window"))

**_And one said to the man clothed with linen_** … One of the angels on one side of the bank of the river _spoke to Christ, who appeared in a human form, as a presage of his future incarnation; and as clothed in linen, expressive of his priestly office, and of his purity and holiness, which qualified him for it_ ; (_See Gill on 10:6_). Which of the angels it was that spake is not said, or on which side of the river he stood; very probably each of them spake in their turn, and joined: _in the same request to Christ_ : **_which was upon the waters of the river_** : _or above them; denoting his power and dominion over men, kingdoms, and nations_ , sometimes signified by waters, and even over those the most tumultuous and raging… ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=012&verse=006> "Opens external link in new window"))

**_And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river_** … _Christ, as he appeared in a human form, and as the High Priest our profession, and as the Mediator that has power over all flesh_ ; so he pronounced articulate sounds with a human voice, and so loud, clear, and distinct, that Daniel could hear every word he said, and for whose sake it was said: **_when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven_** ; the lifting up of the right hand is a gesture used in swearing, and the lifting up of both hands is either for the greater solemnity of the action, or with respect to the two angels that stood one on one side of him, and the other on the other, that both might be eyewitnesses of this solemn affair; though lifting up both hands is often a prayer gesture, and there may be a mixture of both in this action, of both praying and swearing; Christ, as the High Priest, intercedes for his church and people, that their faith fail not till the end of their troubles comes: **_and sware by him that liveth for ever_** ; by the living God, the immortal One, who only hath immortality. Maimonides interprets it, "by the Life of the world"; that is, by God, who is the Life of the world, that gives life and being to all creatures; all live, and move, and have their being in him, and so is greater than all, and by whom an oath is only to be taken. _Christ, as man, swears by his divine Father, who, as such, was greater than he; though, if we understand it of God, Father, Son, and Spirit, the one, only, true, and living God, there is no impropriety in Christ's swearing by himself the living God, which is a character he sometimes bears_ ; see (Hebrews 3:12) (6:13)… ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=012&verse=007> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

**_And I heard, but understood not_** … _Daniel heard what Christ said_ , in answer to the angel, but he did not understand the meaning of it, which he ingenuously confesses; he did not understand what was meant by "time", and "times", and "half a time"; what kind of time this was, and when and how it would end, and which he was very desirous of knowing: **_then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things_**? he applied not to the angel that put the above question, _but to the man clothed with linen; to Christ, whom he perceived to be a divine Person, a Person of dominion, power, and authority, superior to angels, and his Lord and God_ ; and who only could resolve the question he puts, which is somewhat different from that of the angel's, (Daniel 12:6)… ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=012&verse=008> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

Another famous Bible commentator, the late Matthew Henry, wrote:

III. A description of that glorious person whom Daniel saw in vision, _which, it is generally agreed, could be no other that Christ himself, the eternal Word_. He was by the side of the river Hiddekel (Daniel 10:4), probably walking there, not for diversion, but devotion and contemplation, as Isaac walked in the field, to meditate; and, being a person of distinction, he had his servants attending him at some distance. _There he _looked up,_ and saw _one man Christ Jesus._ It must be he, for he appears in the same resemblance wherein he appeared to St. John in the isle of Patmos, Revelation 1:13-15_. His dress was priestly, for he is the high priest of our profession, _clothed in linen,_ as the high priest himself was on the day of atonement, that great day; _his loins were girded_ (in St. John's vision his _paps_ were _girded) with a golden girdle_ of the finest gold, that of Uphaz, for every thing about Christ is the best in its kind. The _girding of the loins_ denotes his ready and diligent application to his work, as his Father's servant, in the business of our redemption. His shape was amiable, _his body like the beryl,_ a precious stone of a sky-colour. His countenance was awful, and enough to strike a terror on the beholders, for his face was _as the appearance of lightning,_ which dazzles the eyes, both brightens and threatens. His _eyes_ were bright and sparkling, _as lamps of fire._ His _arms and feet_ shone _like polished brass,_ Daniel 10:6. His _voice_ was loud, and strong, and very piercing, _like the voice of a multitude._ The _vox Dei_ \--_voice of God_ can overpower the _vox populi_ \--_voice of the people._ _Thus glorious did Christ appear, and it should engage us_ , 1. To think highly and honourably of him. _Now consider how great this man is,_ and in all things let him have the pre-eminence. 2. To admire his condescension for us and our salvation. Over all this splendour he drew a veil when he took upon him the form of a servant, and _emptied himself_ …

II. _The blessed angel that was employed by Christ to converse with him_ gave him all the encouragement and comfort that could be. _It should seem, it was not he whose glory he saw in vision (Daniel 10:5,6) that here _touched him,_ and _talked with him;_ that was Christ, but this seems to have been the angel Gabriel, whom Christ had once before ordered to instruct Daniel, Daniel 8:16_. That glorious appearance (as that of the _God of glory_ to Abraham, Acts 7:2) was to give authority and to gain attention to what the angel should say. Christ himself comforted John when he in a like case _fell at his feet as dead_ (Revelation 1:17); _but here he did it by _the angel,_ whom Daniel saw in a glory much inferior to that of the vision in the verses before; for he was _like the similitude of the sons of men_ (Daniel 10:16), one like the appearance _of a man,_ Daniel 10:18_. When _he_ only _appeared,_ as he had done before (Daniel 9:21), _we do not find that Daniel was put into any disorder by it, as he was by this vision_ ; and therefore he is here employed a third time with Daniel. ([_Matthew Henry Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible_](<http://studylight.org/com/mhc-com/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=010> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

And:

1\. Who it was that asked the question. _Daniel had had a vision of Christ in his glory, the _man clothed in linen_ , Daniel 10:5. But his discourse had been with the angel Gabriel_, and now he _looks_ , and _behold other two_ (Daniel 12:5), two angels that he had not seen before, _one upon the bank of the river on one side and the other on the other side,_ that, the river being between them, they might not whisper to one another, but what they said might be heard. _Christ stood _on the waters of the river,_ (Daniel 12:6)_, _between the banks of Ulai;_ it was therefore proper that the angels his attendants should stand on either bank, that they might be ready to go, one one way and the other the other way, as he should order them. These angels appeared, (1.) To adorn the vision, and make it the more illustrious; and to add to the glory of the Son of man, Hebrews 1:6… 2. To whom this question was put, to the _man clothed in linen,_ of whom we read before (Daniel 10:5), _to Christ our great high priest_ , _who was upon the waters of the river,_ _and whose spokesman, or interpreter, the angel Gabriel had all this while been_. This river was Hiddekel (Daniel 10:4), the same with Tigris, the place whereabout many of the events prophesied of would happen; there therefore is the scene laid. Hiddekel was mentioned as one of the rivers that watered the garden of Eden (Genesis 2:14); _fitly therefore does Christ stand upon that river_ , for by him the trees in the paradise of God are watered. _Waters_ signify _people,_ and so his standing upon the waters denotes his dominion over all; he _sits upon the flood_ (Psalm 29:10); _he treads upon the waters of the sea,_ Job 9:8. And Christ, to show that this was he, in the days of his flesh _walked upon the waters,_ Matthew 14:25. He was _above the waters of the river_ (so some read it); he appeared in the air over the river… Confirmed by an oath. The man _clothed in linen_ lifted up both his hands _to heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever and ever_ that it should be so. _Thus the _mighty angel_ whom St. John saw is brought in, with a plain reference to this vision, standing with his _right foot on the sea_ and _his left foot on the earth,_ and with his hand lifted up to heaven, swearing _that there shall be no longer delay,_ Revelation 10:5,6_… ([Ibid.](<http://studylight.org/com/mhc-com/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=012> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

**Appendix B –**

**Chart of the Various Theophanies/Christophanies Relevant to Daniel 10**

The Glory of Yahweh (Ezek. 1:24, 26-28; 8:1-4; 43:1-3) | The Ancient of Days (Dan. 7:9-10) | The Man of Daniel (cf. 10:4-10; 12:5-7) | The Mighty Angel of Revelation | Jesus Christ (Rev. 1:12-18)  
---|---|---|---|---  
“When the creatures moved, I heard the sound of their wings, **_like the roar of rushing waters, like the voice of the Almighty, like the tumult of an army_** … Above the expanse over their heads was what **_looked like a throne of sapphire, and high above on the throne was a figure like that of a man. I saw that from what appeared to be his waist up he looked like glowing metal, as if full of fire, and that from there down he looked like fire; and brilliant light surrounded him. Like the appearance of a rainbow in the clouds on a rainy day, so was the radiance around him_**. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. When I saw it, I fell facedown, and I heard the voice of one speaking.” “In the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, with the elders of Judah sitting before me** _,_the hand of the Lord GOD fell upon me there_. Then I looked, and behold, a form that had the appearance of a man. Below what appeared to be his waist was fire, and above his waist was something like the appearance of brightness, like gleaming metal. _He put out the form of a hand and took me by a lock of my head__** , and the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven and brought me in visions of God to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the gateway of the inner court that faces north, where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy. And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the vision that I saw in the valley.” “Then the man brought me to the gate facing east, and I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east. His voice was like the roar of rushing waters, and the land was radiant with his glory. The vision I saw was like the vision I had seen when he came to destroy the city and like the visions I had seen by the Kebar River, and I fell facedown.” | “As I looked, ‘thrones were set in place, and the Ancient of Days took his seat. **_His clothing was as white as snow; the hair of his head was white like wool. His throne was flaming with fire, and its wheels were all ablaze. A river of fire was flowing, coming out from before him_**. Thousands upon thousands attended him; ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The court was seated, and the books were opened.” | “On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was standing on the bank of the great river, the Tigris, I looked up and there before me was **_a man dressed in linen, with a belt of the finest gold around his waist. His body was like chrysolite, his face like lightning, his eyes like flaming torches, his arms and legs like the gleam of burnished bronze, and his voice like the sound of a multitude_**. And I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, for the men who were with me did not see the vision, but a great trembling fell upon them, and they fled to hide themselves. So I was left alone and saw this great vision, **_and no strength was left in me; my radiant appearance was fearfully changed, and I retained no strength_**. Then I heard the sound of his words; **_and when I heard the sound of his words, I fell on my face in a deep sleep with my face to the ground. And behold, a hand touched me and set me trembling on my hands and knees_**.” “Then I, Daniel, looked, and there before me stood two others, one on this bank of the river and one on the opposite bank. One of them said to **_the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river_** , ‘How long will it be before these astonishing things are fulfilled?’ **_The man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, lifted his right hand and his left hand toward heaven, and I heard him swear by him who lives forever, saying_** , ‘It will be for a time, times and half a time. When the power of the holy people has been finally broken, all these things will be completed.’” | “Then I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven. **_He was robed in a cloud, with a rainbow above his head; his face was like the sun, and his legs were like fiery pillars_**. He was holding a little scroll, which lay open in his hand. He planted his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land, and he gave a loud shout like the roar of a lion. When he shouted, **_the voices of the seven thunders spoke_**. And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say, ‘Seal up what the seven thunders have said and do not write it down.’ Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land **_raised his right hand to heaven. And he swore by him who lives for ever and ever_** , who created the heavens and all that is in them, the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, and said, ‘There will be no more delay!’” | “I turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. And when I turned I saw seven golden lampstands, and among the lampstands was someone ‘** _like a Son of Man,’ dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest. His head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were like blazing fire. His feet were like bronze glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters_**. In his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance. **_When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead_**. **_Then he placed his right hand on me_** and said: ‘Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last. I am the Living One; I was dead, and behold I am alive for ever and ever! And I hold the keys of death and Hades.”
