# The Messiah in Jewish Traditions [Part 2]

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/messiah_targums2.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# The Messiah in the Jewish Traditions Pt. 2

****

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

**  
New Testament application of OT texts**

In this particular section of [our series](/articles/15-the_messiah_in_jewish_traditions_part_1) we will be quoting the NT corpus to see how Jesus and his followers understood and applied the specific OT texts and promises which we sourced in the first part of our series. We will not be providing any in-depth commentary or exegesis of the NT application of the OT prophecies since that would go beyond the scope of this current article. The purpose here is to show how the inspired authors of the Christian Greek Scriptures believed that Jesus was the One who was predicted to come and that he perfectly fulfills God’s promises to king David. 

It is important to mention here that certain NT passages combine more than one of the OT motifs or prophecies, e.g., Jesus is the Son of Man who sits at God’s right hand, a conflation of Psalm 110:1 and Daniel 7:13-14. Since particular NT texts join one or more of the OT themes or promises together some of the specific verses cited in any given section can also be used in the other sections as well. 

With that said we can now turn our attention to what the NT documents state concerning Jesus fulfilling the OT prophecies. 

**  
1\. Jesus is the unique Son of God and the priestly King of the Psalms who sits enthroned forever and possesses the entire world as his inheritance; the Anointed One or Messiah/Christ whom all must pay homage to and who reigns over the nations with an iron rod from God’s right hand; He who dashes his enemies to pieces in the day of his wrath.**

> "And after he had dismissed the crowds, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone, but the boat by this time was many furlongs distant from the land, beaten by the waves; for the wind was against them. And in the fourth watch of the _night _he came to them, walking on the sea__. But when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were terrified, saying, ‘It is a ghost!’ And they cried out for fear. But immediately he spoke to them, saying, ‘ __Take heart, I AM; have no fear__.’ And Peter answered him, ‘Lord, if it is you, bid me come to you on the water.’ He said, ‘Come.’ So Peter got out of the boat and walked on the water and came to Jesus; but when he saw the wind, he was afraid, and beginning to sink he cried out, ‘Lord, save me.’ Jesus immediately reached out his hand and caught him, saying to him, ‘O man of little faith, why did you doubt?’ And when they got into the boat, the wind ceased. _And those in the boat _worshiped him_ , saying, ‘ _Truly you are the Son of God__.’" Matthew 14:23-33 
> 
> "Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesare'a Philip'pi, he asked his disciples, ‘Who do men say that the Son of man is?’ And they said, ‘Some say John the Baptist, others say Eli'jah, and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.’ He said to them, ‘But who do you say that I am?’ Simon Peter replied, ‘ __You are the Christ, the Son of the living God__.’ And Jesus answered him, ‘Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jona! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but __my Father__ who is in heaven.’" Matthew 16:13-17 
> 
> "He had still one other, __a beloved Son__ ; finally he sent him to them, saying, ‘They will respect __my Son__.’ But those tenants said to one another, ‘ __This is the Heir__ ; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’ Mark 12:6-7 
> 
> "__All things have been delivered to me by my Father__ ; and no one knows who the Son is except the Father, or who the Father is except the Son and any one to whom the Son chooses to reveal him." Luke 10:22 
> 
> "But he said to them, ‘How can they say that the Christ is David's son? _For David himself says in the Book of Psalms_ , "_The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, till I make your enemies a stool for your feet." David thus calls him Lord; so how is he his son?_ ’ Luke 20:41-44 
> 
> "Nathan'a-el answered him, ‘Rabbi, you are __the Son of God__! You are __the King of Israel__!’" John 1:49 
> 
> "the Father loves the Son, __and has given all things into his hand__." John 3:35 
> 
> "Jesus, knowing __that the Father had given all things into his hands__ , and that he had come from God and was going to God," John 13:3 
> 
> "He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. __All that the Father has is mine__ ; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you." John 16-14-15 
> 
> "I am praying for them; I am not praying for the world but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours; __all mine are yours, and yours are mine__ , and I am glorified in them." John 17:9-10 
> 
> "Brethren, I may say to you confidently of the patriarch David that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day. Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants upon his throne, he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption. This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses. Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which you see and hear. For David did not ascend into the heavens; _but he himself says_ , ‘ _The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, till I make your enemies a stool for your feet_.’ Let all the house of Israel therefore know assuredly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified." Acts 2:29-36 
> 
> "When they were released they went to their friends and reported what the chief priests and the elders had said to them. And when they heard it, they lifted their voices together to God and said, ‘Sovereign Lord, who did make the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them, _who by the mouth of our father David, your servant, did say by the Holy Spirit_ , "_Why did the Gentiles rage, and the peoples imagine vain things? The kings of the earth set themselves in array, and the rulers were gathered together, against the Lord and against his Anointed_ " -- for truly in this city there were gathered together against your holy servant Jesus, whom you did anoint, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, to do whatever your hand and your plan had predestined to take place. And now, Lord, look upon their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness, while you stretch out your hand to heal, and signs and wonders are performed through the name of your holy servant Jesus.’ And when they had prayed, the place in which they were gathered together was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God with boldness." Acts 4:23-31 
> 
> "And we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers, this he has fulfilled to us their children by raising Jesus; _as also it is written in the second psalm_ , ‘ _You are my Son, today I have begotten you_.’" Acts 13:32-33 
> 
> "and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power in us who believe, according to the working of his great might which he accomplished in Christ when he raised him from the dead __and made him sit at his right hand in the heavenly places__ , far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in that which is to come; and he has put all things under his feet and has made him the head over all things for the church, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all. Ephesians 1:19-23 
> 
> "If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, __seated at the right hand of God__." Colossians 3:1 
> 
> "He reflects the glory of God and is the exact imprint of his nature, upholding the universe by his word of power. __When he had made purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high__ , having become as much superior to angels as the name he has obtained is more excellent than theirs. For to what angel did God ever say, ‘ __You are my Son, today I have begotten you_ ’_? Or again, ‘I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son’?" Hebrews 1:3-5, 13 
> 
> "So also Christ did not exalt himself to be made a high priest, but was appointed by him who said to him, ‘ __You are my Son, today I have begotten you_ ’_; as he says also in another place, ‘ __You art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchiz'edek__.’" Hebrews 5:5-6 
> 
> "Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a clear conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, _who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God_ , with angels, authorities, and powers subject to him." 1 Peter 3:21-22 
> 
> "Then __the kings of the earth__ and the great men and the generals and the rich and the strong, and every one, slave and free, hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains, calling to the mountains and rocks, ‘Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who is seated on the throne, __and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of their wrath has come__ , and who can stand before it?’" Revelation 6:15-17 
> 
> "Then the seventh angel blew his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, saying, ‘The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord __and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever__.’" Revelation 11:15 
> 
> "And a great portent appeared in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars; she was with child and she cried out in her pangs of birth, in anguish for delivery. And another portent appeared in heaven; behold, a great red dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and seven diadems upon his heads. His tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to bear a child, that he might devour her child when she brought it forth; she brought forth a male child, __one who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron__ , but her child was caught up to God __and to his throne__ … And I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, ‘ _Now the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God _and the authority of his Christ_ have come_, for the accuser of our brethren has been thrown down, who accuses them day and night before our God.’" Revelation 12:1-5, 10 
> 
> "Then I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse! He who sat upon it is called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes war. His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many diadems; and he has a name inscribed which no one knows but himself. He is clad in a robe dipped in blood, and the name by which he is called is _The Word of God_. And the armies of heaven, arrayed in fine linen, white and pure, followed him on white horses. _From his mouth issues a sharp sword with which to smite the nations,_and he will rule them with a rod of iron_ ; he will tread the wine press of the fury _of the wrath of God the Almighty__. On his robe and on his thigh he has a name inscribed, _King of kings and Lord of lords_." Revelation 19:11-16

**  
2\. Jesus is the Holy One of Proverbs, the incomprehensible Son who has complete control of and dominion over the physical realm.**

> "In those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan. And when he came up out of the water, immediately he saw the heavens opened and the Spirit descending upon him like a dove; and a voice came from heaven, ‘ __You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased__.’ … And immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, ‘What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, __the Holy One of God__.’" Mark 1:9-11, 23-24 
> 
> "On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, ‘Let us go across to the other side.’ And leaving the crowd, they took him with them in the boat, just as he was. And other boats were with him. And a great storm of wind arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so that the boat was already filling. But he was in the stern, asleep on the cushion; and they woke him and said to him, ‘Teacher, do you not care if we perish?’ And he awoke and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, ‘Peace! Be still!’ And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. He said to them, ‘Why are you afraid? Have you no faith?’ And they were filled with awe, and said to one another, ‘ __Who then is this, that even wind and sea obey him__?’" Mark 4:35-41 
> 
> "Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go before him to the other side, to Beth-sa'ida, while he dismissed the crowd. And after he had taken leave of them, he went up on the mountain to pray. And when evening came, the boat was out on the sea, and he was alone on the land. __And he saw that they were making headway painfully, for the wind was against them. And about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea. He meant to pass by them, but when they saw him walking on the sea__ they thought it was a ghost, and cried out; for they all saw him, and were terrified. But immediately he spoke to them and said, ‘ __Take heart, I AM; have no fear__.’ And he got into the boat with them and the wind ceased. And they were utterly astounded, for they did not understand about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened." Mark 6:45-52 
> 
> "All things have been delivered to me by my Father; __and no one knows the Son except the Father__ , and no one knows the Father except the Son __and any one to whom the Son chooses to reveal him__." Matthew 11:27 
> 
> "__No one has ascended into heaven but he who descended from heaven__ , the Son of man. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whoever believes in him may have eternal life. For God so loved the world __that he gave his only Son__ , that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life." John 3:13-16 
> 
> "The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, glorified his servant Jesus, whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had decided to release him. __But you denied the Holy and Righteous One__ , and asked for a murderer to be granted to you, __and killed the Author of life__ , whom God raised from the dead. To this we are witnesses." Acts 3:13-15

**  
3\. Jesus is the Mighty God and Suffering Servant of Isaiah who offers his life as a sacrifice for sins.**

> "Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee; and leaving Nazareth he went and dwelt in Caper'na-um by the sea, in the territory of Zeb'ulun and Naph'tali, _that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled_ : ‘ _The land of Zeb'ulun and the land of Naph'tali, toward the sea, across the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles -- the people who sat in darkness have seen a great light, and for those who sat in the region and shadow of death light has dawned_.’ From that time Jesus began to preach, saying, ‘Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’" Matthew 4:12-17 
> 
> "Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there. And many followed him, and he healed them all, and ordered them not to make him known. _This was to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah_ : ‘ _Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved with whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall proclaim justice to the Gentiles. He will not wrangle or cry aloud, nor will any one hear his voice in the streets; he will not break a bruised reed or quench a smoldering wick, till he brings justice to victory; and in his name will the Gentiles hope_.’ Then a blind and dumb demoniac was brought to him, and he healed him, so that the dumb man spoke and saw." Matthew 12:15-22 
> 
> "In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary. And he came to her and said, ‘Hail, O favored one, the Lord is with you!’ But she was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered in her mind what sort of greeting this might be. And the angel said to her, ‘Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. __He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High;__ __and the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David, and he will reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there will be no end__.’ And Mary said to the angel, ‘How shall this be, since I have no husband?’ And the angel said to her, ‘The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God.’" Luke 1:26-35 
> 
> "Now when all the people were baptized, and when Jesus also had been baptized and was praying, the heaven was opened, __and the Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form, as a dove__ , and a voice came from heaven, ‘You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.’" Luke 3:21-22 
> 
> "_For I tell you that this scripture must be fulfilled in me_ , ‘ _And he was reckoned with transgressors'; for what is written about me has its fulfilment_.’" Luke 22:37 
> 
> "So Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and asked, ‘Do you understand what you are reading?’ And he said, ‘How can I, unless some one guides me?’ And he invited Philip to come up and sit with him. _Now the passage of the scripture which he was reading was this_ : ‘ _As a sheep led to the slaughter or a lamb before its shearer is dumb, so he opens not his mouth. In his humiliation justice was denied him. Who can describe his generation? For his life is taken up from the earth_.’ And the eunuch said to Philip, ‘About whom, pray, does the prophet say this, about himself or about some one else?’ Then Philip opened his mouth, _and beginning with this scripture he told him the good news of Jesus_." Acts 8:30-35 
> 
> "For it is evident that our Lord was descended from Judah, and in connection with that tribe Moses said nothing about priests. This becomes even more evident when another priest arises in the likeness of Melchiz'edek, who has become a priest, not according to a legal requirement concerning bodily descent but by the power of an indestructible life. For it is witnessed of him, ‘ __You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchiz'edek__.’ The former priests were many in number, because they were prevented by death from continuing in office; __but he holds his priesthood permanently, because he continues for ever__. Consequently he is able for all time to save those who draw near to God through him, __since he always lives to make intercession for them__. For it was fitting that we should have such a high priest, holy, blameless, unstained, separated from sinners, exalted above the heavens. He has no need, like those high priests, to offer sacrifices daily, first for his own sins and then for those of the people; __he did this once for all when he offered up himself__. Indeed, the law appoints men in their weakness as high priests, but the word of the oath, which came later than the law, appoints a Son who has been made perfect for ever. Now the point in what we are saying is this: __we have such a high priest, one who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven__ , a minister in the sanctuary and the true tent which is set up not by man but by the Lord." Hebrews 7:14-17, 23-28; 8:1-2 
> 
> "But when Christ appeared __as a high priest__ of the good things that have come, then through the greater and more perfect tent (not made with hands, that is, not of this creation) __he entered once for all into the Holy Place__ , taking not the blood of goats and calves __but his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption__. For if the sprinkling of defiled persons with the blood of goats and bulls and with the ashes of a heifer sanctifies for the purification of the flesh, how much more shall __the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God__ , purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God. Therefore he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, since a death has occurred which redeems them from the transgressions under the first covenant… Thus it was necessary for the copies of the heavenly things to be purified with these rites, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ has entered, not into a sanctuary made with hands, a copy of the true one, __but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf__. Nor was it to offer himself repeatedly, as the high priest enters the Holy Place yearly with blood not his own; for then he would have had to suffer repeatedly since the foundation of the world. __But as it is, he has appeared once for all at the end of the age to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself__. And just as it is appointed for men to die once, and after that comes judgment, so Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to deal with sin but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him." Hebrews 9:11-15, 23-28 
> 
> "And by that will we have been sanctified through __the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all__. And every priest stands daily at his service, offering repeatedly the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. __But when Christ had offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God, then to wait until his enemies should be made a stool for his feet__. For by a single offering he has perfected for all time those who are sanctified." Hebrews 10:10-14

**  
4\. Jesus is the Divine Son of Man of Daniel who rules over and is worshiped by all creation.**

> "Another parable he put before them, saying, ‘The kingdom of heaven may be compared __to a man who sowed good seed in HIS field__ ; but while men were sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away. So when the plants came up and bore grain, then the weeds appeared also. And the servants of the householder came and said to him, "Sir, did you not sow good seed in your field? How then has it weeds?" He said to them, "An enemy has done this." The servants said to him, "Then do you want us to go and gather them?" But he said, "No; lest in gathering the weeds you root up the wheat along with them. Let both grow together until the harvest; and at harvest time I will tell the reapers, Gather the weeds first and bind them in bundles to be burned, but gather the wheat into my barn."’ … Then he left the crowds and went into the house. And his disciples came to him, saying, ‘Explain to us the parable of the weeds of the field.’ He answered, ‘ __He who sows the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world__ (i.e. Jesus is claiming to own the world since in the parable the owner represents Christ and the field symbolizes the world), and the good seed means the sons of the kingdom; the weeds are the sons of the evil one, and the enemy who sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the close of the age, and the reapers are angels. Just as the weeds are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at the close of the age. __The Son of man will send HIS angels, and they will gather out of HIS kingdom__ all causes of sin and all evildoers, and throw them into the furnace of fire; there men will weep and gnash their teeth. Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him hear." Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43 
> 
> "__For the Son of man is to come with his angels in the glory of his Father__ , and then he will repay every man for what he has done. Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death before they see __the Son of man coming in his kingdom__." Matthew 16:27-28 
> 
> "Now the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain to which Jesus had directed them. _And when they saw him _they worshiped him__ ; but some doubted. And Jesus came and said to them, ‘ __All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me__. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father __and of the Son__ and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you; __and lo, I am with you always, to the close of the age__.’" Matthew 28:16-20 
> 
> "And then they will see __the Son of man coming in clouds_ with great power and glory. And then he will send out the angels, and gather HIS elect from the four winds_, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven." Mark 13:26-27 
> 
> And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, ‘Have you no answer to make? What is it that these men testify against you?’ But he was silent and made no answer. Again the high priest asked him, ‘Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?’ And Jesus said, ‘I am; and you will see __the Son of man seated at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven__.’ And the high priest tore his garments, and said, ‘Why do we still need witnesses? You have heard his blasphemy. What is your decision?’ And they all condemned him as deserving death." Mark 14:60-64 
> 
> "_When _the Son of man_ comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, _then he will sit on his glorious throne__. Before him will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate them one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, and he will place the sheep at his right hand, but the goats at the left. Then __the King__ will say to those at his right hand, ‘Come, O blessed of __my Father__ , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; for I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.’ Then the righteous will answer him, ‘ __Lord__ , when did we see thee hungry and feed thee, or thirsty and give thee drink? And when did we see thee a stranger and welcome thee, or naked and clothe thee? And when did we see thee sick or in prison and visit thee?’ And __the King__ will answer them, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you did it to me.’ Then he will say to those at his left hand, ‘Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, I was a stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ Then they also will answer, ‘ __Lord__ , when did we see thee hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to thee?’ Then he will answer them, `Truly, I say to you, as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me. And they will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.’" Matthew 25:31-46 
> 
> "While he was still speaking, there came a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. _He drew near to _Jesus_ to kiss him_; but Jesus said to him, ‘Judas, _would you betray _the Son of man_ with a kiss_?’" Luke 22:47-48 
> 
> "The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son, _that all may honor the Son,_EVEN AS_ they honor the Father_. He who does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him… and has given him authority _to execute judgment,_because he is_ _the Son of Man__. John 5:22-23, 27 
> 
> "But he, full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God, _and _Jesus_ standing at the right hand of God_; and he said, ‘Behold, I see the heavens opened, _and _the Son of man_ standing at the right hand of God_.’" Acts 7:55-56 
> 
> "John to the seven churches that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from him who is and who was and who is to come, and from the seven spirits who are before his throne, _and from Jesus Christ_ the faithful witness, the first-born of the dead, _and the ruler of kings on earth_. To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, _to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever_. Amen. _Behold,_he is coming with the clouds_ , and every eye will see him, _every one who pierced him_ ; and all tribes of the earth will wail on account of him_. Even so. Amen… Then I turned to see the voice that was speaking to me, and on turning I saw seven golden lampstands, and in the midst of the lampstands __one like a son of man_ , clothed with a long robe _and with a golden girdle round his breast;_his head and his hair were white as white wool, white as snow_ ; his eyes were like a flame of fire, his feet were like burnished bronze, refined as in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters; in his right hand he held seven stars, from his mouth issued a sharp two-edged sword, and his face was like the sun shining in full strength. When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead. But he laid his right hand upon me, saying, ‘Fear not, I am the first and the last, and the living one; __I died, and behold I am alive for evermore__ , and I have the keys of Death and Hades.’" Revelation 1:4-7, 13-18 
> 
> "Then one of the elders said to me, ‘Weep not; lo, __the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David__ , has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals.’ And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the elders, I saw __a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain__ , with seven horns and with seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth; and he went and took the scroll from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne. And when he had taken the scroll, __the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb__ , each holding a harp, and with golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints; and they sang a new song, saying, ‘Worthy art thou to take the scroll and to open its seals, for thou wast slain and by thy blood didst ransom men for God from every tribe and tongue and people and nation, and hast made them a kingdom and priests to our God, and they shall reign on earth.’ Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders the voice of many angels, numbering myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, ‘Worthy is the Lamb who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might and honor and glory and blessing!’ _And I heard _every creature_ in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and all therein, saying, ‘To him who sits upon the throne _and to the Lamb_ be blessing and honor and glory and might for ever and ever!_’ And the four living creatures said, ‘Amen!’ __and the elders fell down and worshiped__." Revelation 5:5-14

**  
5\. Jesus is the Divine King of Zechariah who comes riding on a foal to bring salvation and to receive worship, the One whom the prophet saw descending with his holy ones and whose feet touch and split the Mount of Olives in half.**

> "And when they drew near to Jerusalem and came to Beth'phage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, saying to them, ‘Go into the village opposite you, and immediately you will find an ass tied, and a colt with her; untie them and bring them to me. If any one says anything to you, you shall say, "The Lord has need of them," and he will send them immediately.’ _This took place to fulfil what was spoken by the prophet, saying_ , ‘ _Tell the daughter of Zion, Behold, your king is coming to you, humble, and mounted on an ass, and on a colt, the foal of an ass_.’ The disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them; they brought the ass and the colt, and put their garments on them, and he sat thereon. Most of the crowd spread their garments on the road, and others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. And the crowds that went before him and that followed him shouted, ‘ __Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!__ ’ And when he entered Jerusalem, all the city was stirred, saying, ‘Who is this?’ And the crowds said, ‘This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee.’ … __And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them__. But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying out in the temple, ‘Hosanna to the Son of David!’ they were indignant; and they said to him, ‘Do you hear what these are saying?’ And Jesus said to them, ‘ _Yes; have you never read_ , "_Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast brought perfect praise_ "?’" Matthew 21:1-10, 14-16 
> 
> "The next day a great crowd who had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, crying, ‘Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, __even the King of Israel__!’ And Jesus found a young ass and sat upon it; _as it is written_ , ‘ _Fear not, daughter of Zion; behold, your king is coming, sitting on an ass's colt!_ ’ His disciples did not understand this at first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that this had been written of him and had been done to him." John 12:12-16 
> 
> "And when he had said this, as they were looking on, he was lifted up, and a cloud took him out of their sight. And while they were gazing into heaven as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white robes, and said, ‘Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into heaven? __This Jesus, who was taken up from you into heaven, will come in the same way as you saw him go into heaven.’ Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet__ [i.e. Jesus ascended from and will return to the Mount of Olives], which is near Jerusalem, a sabbath day's journey away;" Acts 1:9-12 
> 
> "so that he may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father, __at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones__." 1 Thessalonians 3:13

  
**Concluding Remarks**

It is obvious that, as far the NT writers were concerned, Jesus is the perfect fulfillment of the prophecies and promises which are found all throughout the Hebrew Scriptures. In the following sections we will be quoting from specific Jewish writings to see how the Jews before, during and after the time of Christ understood and explained these very same OT texts. 

  
**Related Articles**

[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_dilemma.htm](/articles/6-jews_the_messiah_and_the_prophet_of_islam)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_concept.htm](/articles/4-the_concept_of_messiah_in_the_hebrew_bible_and_the_quran)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_god.htm](/articles/4-the_messiah_as_israels_god_and_king_more_evidence_from_the_hebrew_bible_for_the)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_worshiped.htm](/articles/4-all_the_nations_will_serve_him)  
<https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/proverbs_30_4.htm>  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/jesus_walks_on_sea.htm](/articles/4-the_lord_jesus__the_maker_and_ruler_of_creation)  
[/articles/15-the_inter-testamental_jewish_literature_and_the_deity_of_the_lord_jesus](/articles/15-the_inter-testamental_jewish_literature_and_the_deity_of_the_lord_jesus)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_deity_isaiah.htm](/articles/4-the_deity_of_the_messiah_in_isaiah_and_in_light_of_new_testament_exegesis)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/jesus_mighty_god.htm](/articles/4-jesus_christ__the_mighty_god_more_ot_evidence_for_the_deity_of_the_messiah)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/messiah_exaltation.htm](/articles/4-the_exaltation_of_the_messiah_in_isaiah__additional_ot_evidence_for_the_deity_of)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/jesus_on_throne.htm](/articles/4-jesus_as_the_occupier_of_gods_heavenly_throne)  
[http:/answering-islam.org/Shamoun/jesus_most_high.htm](/articles/4-the_exalted_lord_of_glory_jesus_as_the_most_high_god)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/psalm110_1.htm](/articles/4-examining_psalm_1101__a_look_at_its_implications_on_god_being_a_multi-personal_b)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/jesus_above_creation.htm](/articles/4-the_lord_jesus_the_divine_son_who_is_superior_to_all_creation)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/q_son_of_man.htm](/articles/1-should_or_should_we_not_trust_athe_son_of_man)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/name_glory_angel.htm](/articles/4-the_divine_name_and_glory_of_yahweh__more_biblical_evidence_for_the_deity_of_god)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/q_jesus_forgives.htm](/articles/1-jesus_authority_to_forgive_sins)  
[https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/serve_besides_allah3.htm](/articles/3-part_3)  
<https://answeringislam.info/Responses/Osama/zawadi_sabbath_lord2a.htm>  
[https://answeringislam.info/Responses/Osama/zawadi_sabbath_lord2b.htm](https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/Responses/Osama/zawadi_sabbath_lord2b.htm)
