# The Messiah in Jewish Traditions [Part 3 Appendix]

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/messiah_lxx_appendix.html)

**Category:** 15 New Christological Issues

---

# Appendix 

**The Witness of Christian Apologist Justin Martyr [AD 100-165]**

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

Justin Martyr was an influential 2nd Christian apologist who wrote many tracts defending and explaining the truth of Christianity to both pagans and Jews. His writings give us an idea of what the early Church believed concerning OT appearances of Jesus and how Christians understood and interpreted some of the various passages which we looked at in our article. Since Justin used the Greek version of the Hebrew Scriptures his witness becomes all the more important to our discussion. 

Here is a small sampling of what Justin Martyr wrote concerning these matters.

> **Chapter 32. Trypho objecting that Christ is described as glorious by Daniel, Justin distinguishes two advents**

> > **Trypho:** These and such like Scriptures, sir, compel us to wait for Him who, as Son of Man, receives from the Ancient of days the everlasting kingdom. But this so-called Christ of yours was dishonourable and inglorious, so much so that the last curse contained in the law of God fell on him, for he was crucified.

> > **Justin:** If, sirs, it were not said by the Scriptures which I have already quoted, that His form was inglorious, and His generation not declared, and that for His death the rich would suffer death, and with His stripes we should be healed, and that He would be led away like a sheep; and if I had not explained that there would be two advents of His—one in which He was pierced by you; a second, when you shall know Him whom you have pierced, and your tribes shall mourn, each tribe by itself, the women apart, and the men apart—then I must have been speaking dubious and obscure things. But now, by means of the contents of those Scriptures esteemed holy and prophetic among you, I attempt to prove all [that I have adduced], in the hope that some one of you may be found to be of that remnant which has been left by the grace of the Lord of Sabaoth for the eternal salvation. In order, therefore, that the matter inquired into may be plainer to you, I will mention to you other words also spoken by the blessed David, from which you will perceive that the Lord is called the Christ by the Holy Spirit of prophecy; and that the Lord, the Father of all, has brought Him again from the earth, setting Him at His own right hand, until He makes His enemies His footstool; which indeed happens from the time that our Lord Jesus Christ ascended to heaven, after He rose again from the dead, the times now running on to their consummation; and he whom Daniel foretells would have dominion for a time, and times, and an half, is even already at the door, about to speak blasphemous and daring things against the Most High. But you, being ignorant of how long he will have dominion, hold another opinion. For you interpret the 'time' as being a hundred years. But if this is so, the man of sin must, at the shortest, reign three hundred and fifty years, in order that we may compute that which is said by the holy Daniel—'and times'—to be _two_ times only. All this I have said to you in digression, in order that you at length may be persuaded of what has been declared against you by God, that you are foolish sons; and of this, 'Therefore, behold, I will proceed to take away this people, and shall take them away; and I will strip the wise of their wisdom, and will hide the understanding of their prudent men.' and may cease to deceive yourselves and those who hear you, and may learn of us, who have been taught wisdom by the grace of Christ. The words, then, which were spoken by David, are these: 

> > > _The Lord said unto My Lord, Sit at My right hand, until I make Your enemies Your footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of Your strength out of Sion: rule also in the midst of Your enemies. With You shall be, in the day, the chief of Your power, in the beauties of Your saints._From the womb, before the morning star, have I begotten You_. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent: You are a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. The Lord is at Your right hand: He has crushed kings in the day of His wrath: He shall judge among the heathen, He shall fill [with] the dead bodies. He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall He lift up the head.' _([_Dialogue with Trypho_](<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/01283.htm> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

And:

> **Chapter 56. God who appeared to Moses is distinguished from God the Father**

> > **Justin:** Moses, then, the blessed and faithful servant of God, declares that He who appeared to Abraham under the oak in Mamre is God, sent with the two angels in His company to judge Sodom by Another who remains ever in the supercelestial places, invisible to all men, holding personal intercourse with none, whom we believe to be Maker and Father of all things; for he speaks thus: 'God appeared to him under the oak in Mamre, as he sat at his tent-door at noontide. And lifting up his eyes, he saw, and behold, three men stood before him; and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the door of his tent; and he bowed himself toward the ground, and said . . .' 'Abraham went up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord: and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrha, and toward the adjacent country, and beheld, and, lo, a flame went up from the earth, like the smoke of a furnace.'

> And when I had made an end of quoting these words, I asked them if they had understood them. And they said they had understood them, but that the passages adduced brought forward no proof that there is any other God or Lord, or that the Holy Spirit says so, besides the Maker of all things.

> > **Justin:** I shall attempt to persuade you, since you have understood the Scriptures, [of the truth] of what I say, _that there is, and that there is said to be, another God and Lord subject to the Maker of all things; who is also called an Angel, because He announces to men whatsoever the Maker __ of all things_—above whom there is no other God—wishes to announce to them._  
> _

> I quoted once more the previous passage _…_

> > **Justin:** If I could not have proved to you from the Scriptures _that one of those three is God, and is called Angel, because, as I already said, He brings messages to those to whom God the Maker of all things wishes_[messages to be brought], then in regard to Him who appeared to Abraham on earth in human form in like manner as the two angels who came with Him, _and who was God even before the creation of the world_ , it were reasonable for you to entertain the same belief as is entertained by the whole of your nation…

> > **Justin:** _(After another pause.)_ And now have you not perceived, my friends, that one of the three, who is both God and Lord, and ministers to Him who is in the heavens, is Lord of the two angels? For when [the angels] proceeded to Sodom, He remained behind, and communed with Abraham in the words recorded by Moses; and when He departed after the conversation, Abraham went back to his place. And when he came [to Sodom], the two angels no longer conversed with Lot, but Himself, as the Scripture makes evident; and He is the Lord who received commission from the Lord who [remains] in the heavens, i.e., the Maker of all things, to inflict upon Sodom and Gomorrha the [judgments] which the Scripture describes in these terms: 'The Lord rained down upon Sodom and Gomorrha sulphur and fire from the Lord out of heaven.' …
> 
> **Chapter 58. The same is proved from the visions which appeared to Jacob…**

> > **Justin:** It is again written by Moses, my brethren, _that He who is called God and appeared to the patriarchs is called both Angel and Lord_ , in order that from this you may understand Him to be minister to the Father of all things, as you have already admitted, and may remain firm, persuaded by additional arguments. The word of God, therefore, [recorded] by Moses, when referring to Jacob the grandson of Abraham, speaks thus:

> > > _And it came to pass, when the sheep conceived, that I saw them with my eyes in the dream: And, behold, the he-goats and the rams which leaped upon the sheep and she-goats were spotted with white, and speckled and sprinkled with a dun colour. And the Angel of God said to me in the dream, Jacob, Jacob. And I said, What is it, Lord? And He said, Lift up your eyes, and see that the he-goats and rams leaping on the sheep and she-goats are spotted with white, speckled, and sprinkled with adun colour. For I have seen what Laban does unto you. I am the God who appeared to you in Bethel, where you anointed a pillar and vowed a vow unto Me. Now therefore arise, and get you out of this land, and depart to the land of your birth, and I shall be with you.__[Genesis 31:10-13]_

> > And again, in other words, speaking of the same Jacob, it thus says:

> > > _And having risen up that night, he took the two wives, and the two women-servants, and his eleven children, and passed over the ford Jabbok; and he took them and went over the brook, and sent over all his belongings. But Jacob was left behind alone, and an Angel wrestled with him until morning. And He saw that He is not prevailing against him, and He touched the broad part of his thigh; and the broad part of Jacob's thigh grew stiff while he wrestled with Him. And He said, Let Me go, for the day breaks. But he said, I will not let You go, except You bless me. And He said to him, What is your name? And he said, Jacob. And He said, Your name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel shall be your name; for you have prevailed with God, and with men shall be powerful. And Jacob asked Him, and said, Tell me Your name. But he said, Why do you ask after My name? And He blessed him there. And Jacob called the name of that place Peniel, for I saw God face to face, and my soul rejoiced.__[Genesis 32:22-30]_

> > And again, in other terms, referring to the same Jacob, it says the following:

> > > _And Jacob came to Luz, in the land of Canaan, which is Bethel, he and all the people that were with him. And there he built an altar, and called the name of that place Bethel; for there God appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother Esau. And Deborah, Rebekah's nurse, died, and was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and Jacob called the name of it The Oak of Sorrow. And God appeared again to Jacob in Luz, when he came out from Mesopotamia in Syria, and He blessed him. And God said to him, Your name shall be no more called Jacob, but Israel shall he your name.__[Genesis 35:6-10]_

> > He is called God, and He is and shall be God…

> **Chapter 59. God distinct from the Father conversed with Moses**

> > **Justin:** Permit me, further, to show you from the book of Exodus how this same One, _who is both Angel, and God_ , and Lord, and man, and who appeared in human form to Abraham and Isaac, _appeared in a flame of fire from the bush, and conversed with Moses_...
> 
> **Chapter 63. It is proved that this God was incarnate**

> > **Trypho:** This point has been proved to me forcibly, and by many arguments, my friend. It remains, then, to prove that He submitted to become man by the Virgin, according to the will of His Father; and to be crucified, and to die. Prove also clearly, that after this He rose again and ascended to heaven.

> > **Justin:** This, too, has been already demonstrated by me in the previously quoted words of the prophecies, my friends; which, by recalling and expounding for your sakes, I shall endeavour to lead you to agree with me also about this matter. The passage, then, which Isaiah records, 'Who shall declare His generation? for His life is taken away from the earth,'—does it not appear to you to refer to One who, not having descent from men, was said to be delivered over to death by God for the transgressions of the people?—of whose blood, Moses (as I mentioned before), when speaking in parable, said, that He would wash His garments in the blood of the grape; since His blood did not spring from the seed of man, but from the will of God. And then, what is said by David, _'In the splendours of Your holiness _have I begotten You from the womb, before the morning star_. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek_,' —does this not declare to you that [He was] from of old, and that the God and Father of all things intended Him to be begotten by a human womb? And speaking in other words, which also have been already quoted, [he says]: _'Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of rectitude is the sceptre of Your kingdom. You have loved righteousness, and hast hated iniquity: therefore God, even your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness above Your fellows. [He has anointed You] with myrrh, and oil, and cassia from Your garments, from the ivory palaces, whereby they made You glad. King's daughters are in Your honour. The queen stood at Your right hand, clad in garments embroidered with gold. Hearken, O daughter, and behold, and incline your ear, and forget your people and the house of your father; and the King shall desire your beauty:_because he is your Lord, and you shall worship Him__.' Therefore these words testify explicitly that He is witnessed to by Him who established these things, _as deserving to be worshipped, as God and as Christ_. Moreover, that the word of God speaks to those who believe in Him as being one soul, and one synagogue, and one church, as to a daughter; that it thus addresses the church which has sprung from His name and partakes of His name (for we are all called Christians), is distinctly proclaimed in like manner in the following words, which teach us also to forget [our] old ancestral customs, when they speak thus: 'Hearken, O daughter, and behold, and incline your ear; forget your people and the house of your father, and the King shall desire your beauty: _because He is your Lord, and you shall worship Him_.' ([Source;](<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/01285.htm> "Opens external link in new window") underline emphasis ours) 

Again:

> **Chapter 76. From other passages the same majesty and government of Christ are proved**

> > **Justin:** For when Daniel speaks of 'one like the Son of man' who received the everlasting kingdom, does he not hint at this very thing? For he declares that, in saying 'like the Son of man,' He appeared, and was man, but not of human seed. And the same thing he proclaimed in mystery when he speaks of this stone which was cut out without hands. For the expression 'it was cut out without hands' signified that it is not a work of man, but [a work] of the will of the Father and God of all things, who brought Him forth. And when Isaiah says, 'Who shall declare His generation?' he meant that His descent could not be declared. Now no one who is a man of men has a descent that cannot be declared. And when Moses says that He will wash His garments in the blood of the grape, does not this signify what I have now often told you is an obscure prediction, namely, that He had blood, but not from men; just as not man, but God, has begotten the blood of the vine? _And when Isaiah calls Him the Angel of mighty counsel_ , did he not foretell Him to be the Teacher of those truths which He did teach when He came [to earth]? For He alone taught openly those mighty counsels which the Father designed both for all those who have been and shall be well-pleasing to Him, and also for those who have rebelled against His will, whether men or angels… And now we, who believe in our Lord Jesus, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, when we exorcise all demons and evil spirits, have them subjected to us. For if the prophets declared obscurely that Christ would suffer, and thereafter be Lord of all, yet that [declaration] could not be understood by any man until He Himself persuaded the apostles that such statements were expressly related in the Scriptures. For He exclaimed before His crucifixion: 'The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the Scribes and Pharisees, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.' Luke 9:22 _And David predicted that He would be born from the womb before sun and moon, according to the Father's will, and made Him known, being Christ, as God strong and to be worshipped_. ([Source](<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/01286.htm> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

Finally, Justin lists the various names which the OT prophets ascribed to the Lord Jesus Christ, one of which includes the Angel of Great Counsel that is taken from the Greek version of Isaiah 9:6:

> **Chapter 126. The various names of Christ according to both natures. It is shown that He is God, and appeared to the patriarchs**

> > **Justin:** But if you knew, Trypho, _who He is that is called at one time the Angel of great counsel, and a Man by Ezekiel, and like the Son of man by Daniel, and a Child by Isaiah, and Christ and God to be worshipped by David_ , and Christ and a Stone by many, and Wisdom by Solomon, and Joseph and Judah and a Star by Moses, and the East by Zechariah, and the Suffering One and Jacob and Israel by Isaiah again, and a Rod, and Flower, and Corner-Stone, and Son of God, you would not have blasphemed Him who has now come, and been born, and suffered, and ascended to heaven; who shall also come again, and then your twelve tribes shall mourn. For if you had understood what has been written by the prophets, _you would not have denied that He was God, Son of the only, unbegotten, unutterable God_. For Moses says somewhere in Exodus the following: 'The Lord spoke to Moses, and said to him, I am the Lord, and I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, being their God; and my name I revealed not to them, and I established my covenant with them.' And thus again he says, 'A man wrestled with Jacob,' and asserts it was God; narrating that Jacob said, 'I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.' And it is recorded that he called the place where He wrestled with him, appeared to and blessed him, the Face of God (Peniel). And Moses says that God appeared also to Abraham near the oak in Mamre, when he was sitting at the door of his tent at mid-day. Then he goes on to say: 'And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, three men stood before him; and when he saw them, he ran to meet them.' After a little, one of them promises a son to Abraham: 'Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, and I am old? Is anything impossible with God? At the time appointed I will return, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son. And they went away from Abraham.' Again he speaks of them thus: 'And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom.' Then to Abraham He who was and is again speaks: 'I will not hide from Abraham, my servant, what I intend to do.'

> And what follows in the writings of Moses I quoted and explained:

> > From which I have demonstrated _that He who is described as God_ appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and the other patriarchs, _was appointed under the authority of the Father and Lord, and ministers to His will_.

> Then I went on to say what I had not said before:

> > And so, when the people desired to eat flesh, and Moses had lost faith in Him, _who also there is called the Angel_ , and who promised that God would give them to satiety, _He who is both God and the Angel, sent by the Father_ , is described as saying and doing these things. For thus the Scripture says: 'And the Lord said to Moses, ‘Will the Lord's hand not be sufficient? you shall know now whether my word shall conceal you or not.’ And again, in other words, it thus says: 'But the Lord spoke unto me, You shall not go over this Jordan: the Lord your God, who goes before your face, He shall cut off the nations.' ([Source](<http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/01289.htm> "Opens external link in new window"); underline emphasis ours)

Even though Justin uses the title Angel to show that Jesus is the OT Angel of Yahweh, he is quite clear in his explanation that he doesn’t mean that Christ was a created spirit being. Justin’s view is that Christ wasn’t an angel by nature but only one in function because he “announces to men whatsoever the Maker __ of all things wishes to announce to them” and brings “messages to those to whom God the Maker of all things wishes.” 

Hence, Justin’s testimony is an ancient witness to the teachings of the followers of the Lord Jesus’ Apostles and their disciples. Justin provides attestation that the inheritors of the Apostles – those men and women who were appointed to preserve and pass on the true Apostolic faith – believed that Jesus Christ appeared in the OT as the Divine Angel of Yahweh and took verses such as Psalm 110:3 as prophecies affirming Jesus’ actual, personal prehuman existence.
