# Five Step Outline Proving Muhammad is Worshiped as a God

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/five-step-outline-proving-muhammad-is.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-3330055185603645788" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><header class="entry-header" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 14px;'><h1 class="entry-title" style='box-sizing: inherit; clear: both; color: #444444; font-family: "Open Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 1.4; margin: 0px 0px 1.1rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'>Five Step Outline Proving Muhammad is Worshiped as a God</h1></header><div class="entry-content" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; counter-reset: footnotes 0; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 0px 0px 1.1em;">In this relatively short post I am going present the evidence proving that Muhammad turned himself into another deity alongside his false god.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">1. Muhammad said.</strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">الدُّعَاءُ هُوَ الْعِبَادَةُ</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Du’a</em> (invocation) <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">huwa</em> (is) <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">al-Ibadah</em> (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">THE</em> worship, e.g., the very heart/ essence of worship).”</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Ahmad, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah, Al-`Hakimand others, collected this narration, which Al-`Hakim, Adh-Dhahabi and Al-Albani graded as <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Sahih</em> (sound, reliable, authentic).</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">2. Worshipping others besides Allah is <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Shirk</em> (ascribing the unique characteristics and functions of Allah to a creature).</strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Worship Allah and join none with Him in worship (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Wa’abudoo Allaha wala tushrikoo</em>)</strong>, and do good to parents, kinsfolk, orphans, <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Al-Masakin</em> (the poor), the neighbour who is near of kin, the neighbour who is a stranger, the companion by your side, the wayfarer (you meet), and those (slaves) whom your right hands possess. Verily, Allah does not like such as are proud and boastful; S. 4:36</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Verily, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with him in worship</strong>, but He forgives except that (anything else) to whom He pleases, and whoever sets up partners with Allah in worship, he has indeed invented a tremendous sin. S. 4:48 – Cf. 4:116; 2:22</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">3.  Invoking others besides Allah involves <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Uluhiyyah</em>/<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Ibadah</em> (worship/service).</strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">And invoke (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">tad’u</em>) not any other <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">ilah </em>(god) along with Allah</strong>, <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">La ilaha illa Huwa</em> (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Everything will perish save His Face. His is the Decision, and to Him you (all) shall be returned. S. 28:88</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">4. According to certain Sahih reports, Muhammad exhorted his followers to invoke/supplicate (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">du’a</em>) him, which they did even after his death.</strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">3578. </strong>‘Uthman bin Hunaif narrated that a blind man came to the Prophet and said to him: “Supplicate to Allah to heal me.” He said: “If you wish, I will supplicate for you, and if you wish, you can be patient, for that is better for you.” He said: “Then supplicate to him.” He said: “So he ordered him to perform<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Wudu’</em> and to make his <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Wudu’</em> complete, and to supplicate with this supplication: ‘O Allah, I ask You and turn towards You by Your Prophet Muhammad, the Prophet of Mercy. Indeed, I have turned to my Lord, BY MEANS OF YOU, concerning this need of mine, so that it can be resolved, So Allah so accept HIS INTERCESSION for me (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Allahumma Inni As’aluka WA MUHAMMADIN Nabi-Ir-Rahmati Tawajjahtu Bika Ila Rabbi Fi Hajati Hadhihi Lituqda Li, Allahumma FASHAFFI‘HU Fiya</em>).’” <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">(<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">SAHIH</em>)</strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">[He said]: This <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Hadith</em> is <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Hasan SAHIH Gharib</em>, we do not know of it except through this route, as a narration of Abu Ja‘far, and he is someone other than Al-Khatmi, [and Uthman bin Hunaif is the brother of Sahl bin Hunaif] (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">English Translation of Jami‘ At-Tirmidhi: Compiled by Imam Hafiz Abu ‘Eisa Mohammad Ibn ‘Eisa At-Tirmidhi</em>, translated by Abu Khaliyl (USA), ahadith edited and referenced by Hafiz Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i [Darussalam Publishers &amp; Distributors, First Edition: November 2007], Volume 6, From Hadith No. 3291 to 3956, Various Narrations On The Chapters Of Supplications, Chapter 118, p. 283 <a href="http://sunnah.com/tirmidhi/48/209" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">http://sunnah.com/tirmidhi/48/209</a>; capital and underline emphasis mine)</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Here is a different version of this same hadith:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">1385. </strong>It was narrated from ‘Uthman bin Hunaif that a blind man came to the Prophet and said to him: “Pray to Allah to heal me.” He said: “If you wish to store your reward for the Hereafter, that is better, or if you wish, I will supplicate for you.” He said: “Supplicate.” He said: “So he told him to perform ablution and do it well, and to pray two<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Rak’ah</em>, and to say this supplication: “<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Allahumma inni as’aluka wa atawajjahu ilaika BI-MUHAMMADIN NABIYYIR-RAHMA.YA MUHAMMADU inni qad tawajjahtu bika ila rabbi fi hajati hadhihi Lituqda. Allahumma FASHAFFI‘HU fiya</em> (O Allah, I ask of You and I turn my face towards You BY VIRTUE OF THE INTERCESSION OF MUHAMMAD THE PROPHET OF MERCY. O MUHAMMAD, I have turned to my Lord BY VIRTUE OF YOUR INTERCESSION concerning this need of mine, so that it may be met. O Allah, accept HIS INTERCESSION concerning me)”. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">(</strong><em style="box-sizing: inherit;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">SAHIH</strong></em><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">)</strong> (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">English Translation of Sunan Ibn Majah: Compiled by Imam Muhammad Bin Yazeed Ibn Majah Al-Qazwini</em>, Ahadith edited and referenced by Hafiz Abu Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i, translated by Nasiruddin al-Khattab (Canada), final review by Abu Khaliyl (USA) [Darussalam Publications and Distributors, First Edition: June 2007], Volume 2, From Hadith no. 803 to 1782, 5. The Chapters Of Establishing The Prayer And The <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Sunnah</em> Regarding Them, Chapter 189. What Was Narrated Concerning Prayer At Times Of Need, pp. 329-330 <a href="http://sunnah.com/urn/1287330" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">http://sunnah.com/urn/1287330</a>; capital emphasis mine)</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">THE HADITH OF THE MAN IN NEED</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Moreover, Tabarani, in his “al-Mu’jam al saghir,” reports a hadith from ‘Uthman ibn Hunayf that a man repeatedly visited Uthman ibn Affan concerning something he needed, but Uthman paid no attention to him or his need. The man met Ibn Hunayf and complained to him about the matter – this being after the death (wisal) of the Prophet and after the caliphates of Abu Bakr and Umar – so Uthman ibn Hunayf, who was one of the Companions who collected hadiths and was learned in the religion of Allah, said: “Go to the place of ablution and perform ablution (wudu), then come to the mosque, perform two rak’as of prayer therein, and say:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">‘O Allah, I ask You and turn to You <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">through our Prophet Muhammad, the Prophet of mercy; O MUHAMMAD (Ya Muhammad), I turn through you to my Lord</strong>, that He may fulfill my need,’ and mention your need. Then come so that I can go with you [to the caliph Uthman].” So the man left and did as he had been told, then went to the door of Uthman ibn Affan, and the doorman came, took him by the hand, brought him to Uthman ibn Affan, and seated him next to him on a cushion. ‘Uthman asked, “What do you need?” and the man mentioned what he wanted, and Uthman accomplished it for him, then he said, “I hadn’t remembered your need until just now,” adding, “Whenever you need something, just mention it.” Then, the man departed, met Uthman ibn Hunayf, and said to him, “May Allah reward you! He didn’t see to my need or pay any attention to me until you spoke with him.” Uthman ibn Hunayf replied, “By Allah, I didn’t speak to him, but I have seen a blind man come to the Messenger of Allah and complain to him of the loss of his eyesight. The Prophet said, “Can you not bear it?’ and the man replied, ‘O Messenger of Allah, I do not have anyone to lead me around, and it is a great hardship for me.’ The Prophet told him, ‘Go to the place of ablution and perform ablution (wudu), then pray two rak’as of prayer and make the supplications.’” Ibn Hunayf went on, “By Allah, we didn’t part company or speak long before the man returned to us as if nothing had ever been wrong with him.”</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">This is an explicit, unequivocal text from a prophetic Companion proving the legal validity of tawassul through the dead. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">The account has been classified as rigously authenticated (SAHIH) by Baihaqi, Mundhiri, and Haythami</strong>. (Nuh Ha Mim Keller, <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Tawassul: Supplicating Allah through an Intermediary</em> (From Reliance of the Traveller) <a href="http://seekershub.org/ans-blog/2011/07/02/tawassul-supplicating-allah-through-an-intermediary/" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">http://seekershub.org/ans-blog/2011/07/02/tawassul-supplicating-allah-through-an-intermediary/</a>; bold and capital emphasis mine)</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">5. Muhammad, therefore, turned himself into another god besides Allah by causing his followers to make <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">du’a</em> to him, which is the heart of worship.</strong></p></div>

</div>
