# Russian Patriarch Kirill on Islam, Judaism & Buddhism

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/russian-patriarch-kirill-on-islam.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-7832661360173467064" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><header class="entry-header" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 14px;'><h1 class="entry-title" style='box-sizing: inherit; clear: both; color: #444444; font-family: "Open Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 1.4; margin: 0px 0px 1.1rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'>Russian Patriarch Kirill on Islam, Judaism &amp; Buddhism</h1></header><div class="entry-content" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; counter-reset: footnotes 0; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 0px 0px 1.1em;">The following excerpt is taken from <a href="https://mospat.ru/en/news/93187/" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">His Holiness Patriarch Kirill meets with Sheikh ul-Islam</a> Allahshukur Pashazade, Chairman of the Caucasus Muslims’ Board:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">His Holiness Patriarch Kirill said in response:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“Your words have come from the heart, and I could feel that. And as for interfaith relations of our Church, one of the strongest bonds, perhaps, is the one that links you and me.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“Orthodox Christians and Muslims co-exist in Russia but, by God’s mercy, our country has never known religious wars. We were brought up that way, and the same was true of the pre-revolutionary Russia – the tsars saw to it that no conflicts occurred between Orthodox Christians and Muslims. You know that there were Muslim military leaders at court, in the head of state’s entourage. That is, the Islamic Ummah, the Muslims, be it in times when they were subjects of the Russian Empire or citizens of the Soviet Union but especially nowadays constitute an essential factor in strengthening inter-ethnic peace in Russia, serving as a bridge that helps Russia develop its relations with the Islamic world and, of course, as a bridge between our two peoples.<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>“Once again, I would like to emphasise your personal contribution. You have always been well-disposed towards the Orthodoxy, towards our people, and I could feel your good attitude towards me. You have always spoken frankly and cordially, with your words being in line with your actions at all times.<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>“When it comes to diplomacy in a good sense of this word – not as an art of achieving one’s political goals by any means, but as an instrument intended to ensure the development of good relations among countries and nations – the diplomacy you engage in, with your talent and authority, certainly brings great benefit to our countries and peoples. I wholeheartedly thank you for that.<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>“Friendship between our two countries and peoples, our two presidents’ policy and our countries’ economic, political and cultural cooperation – all these significant factors create a unique atmosphere in the relationship between Russia and your blessed country, as well as in our relations as religious leaders. I would like to reiterate that the relations between Muslims and Orthodox Christians in our two countries play an important role in strengthening inter-state ties. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">Therefore, by serving an important cause of establishing mutual understanding between people who believe in God</u></strong> we at the same time help strengthen inter-state relations and bonds between our two nations.<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>“With all my heart, I wish prosperity to Azerbaijan and success to your remarkable leader, who is a really talented politician and a person of high, including political, culture. I would like to cordially thank you for the hospitality. I always feel this special cordiality when I meet with you, your colleagues and brothers here. I would like to assure you of my reciprocal warm feelings. Time and again, I wish help from above to you and all your relatives, friends and colleagues. May we all continue to work together in furthering Azerbaijan-Russia relations.”<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>To conclude the meeting, Sheikh ul-Islam Allahshukur Pashazade and His Holiness Patriarch Kirill exchanged memorable gifts. (Emphasis mine)</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">That’s not all. This next section is taken from <a href="https://mospat.ru/en/news/90360/" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">Address by Patriarch KIRILL of Moscow and All Russia at</a> meeting of Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><em style="box-sizing: inherit;">On the 19th of May, 2023, His Holiness Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Rus’, who is making a Patriarchal visit to Tatarstan, took part in a meeting of Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group held at the Kazan City Hall and addressed the audience.</em></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Address by Patriarch KIRILL of Moscow and All Russia at the meeting of Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Kazan, 18<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">th</span> May 2023</em></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Dear Rustam Nurgaliyevich,</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Dear Muslim religious leaders, </p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">dear participants in the forum, </p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">I greet you with all my heart, happy to be here with you today, on the blessed Kazan land, and take part in this important meeting.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Russia has long-standing relations with the Muslim world. Since the Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group was set up, the Russian Orthodox Church has been actively engaging in its work.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Our meeting takes place in Kazan. The capital of Tatarstan, perhaps like no other place in Russia, is a visual symbol of fruitful cooperation between people of different faiths for the good of their country and nation. In this city, mosques stand next to churches; Muslim and Orthodox theology is flourishing. Here Christians and Muslims work together for the benefit of the entire society.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">I would like to thank esteemed Rustam Nurgaliyevich Minnikhanov, head of the Republic of Tatarstan, for organising this important event. Traditionally, the head of the Kazan Metropolia acts as representative of the Russian Church in the Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group. Metropolitan Feofan of blessed memory did much in that capacity, and now his successor, Metropolitan Kirill of Kazan and Tatarstan, who is present here, is one of the Group members.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">As we look at what is going on in the world, we cannot but see that Western interference in the affairs of other countries, in particular, the Middle East has had sorrowful consequences. Less than a month ago it was the 10<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">th</span> anniversary of the abduction of two metropolitans of Aleppo in Syria. Metropolitans Paul of the Orthodox Church of Antioch and Mar Gregorios Yohanna were kidnapped by terrorists and we still do not know what happened to those remarkable religious leaders. The so-called “Arab Spring” only brought sorrow and countless tribulations to people of those countries, the majority of them Muslims. The Western forces were trying to use a religious factor to destroy those countries’ statehood, to sow enmity and provoke divisions on religious grounds in society. It resulted in an outburst of brutality and violence, and a surge in terror attacks committed under religious slogans. Our own history and the history of other countries clearly show that such approach is inadmissible. We – Christians and Muslims – have to stand against extremism, and in this regard the work of the Russia-Islam Strategic Vision Group is of particular value and significance.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">For decades, the Moscow Patriarchate has been maintaining brotherly relations with Islamic leaders and organisations. In recent years, these contacts have intensified considerably. It is gratifying to note that every such meeting is held in the atmosphere of mutual understanding. The Department for External Church Relations of the Moscow Patriarchate has been taking part in this work for many years. In November 2018, the Expert Council under the Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia for Cooperation with the Islamic World was established. Not long ago, we met with the Secretary General of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the head of the Muslim World League. This February, Russian and Iranian theologians held their 12<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">th</span> meeting in Moscow, continuing the dialogue that began more than 25 years ago.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Almost 25 years ago the Interreligious Council of Russia was established. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">MY BROTHERS, leaders of the Islamic and Judaic communities in Russia, and I founded it in December 1998</strong>. The Council helps the leaders of traditional religions – <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">Orthodoxy, Islam, Judaism AND BUDDHISM</u></strong> – to coordinate their work, exchange views on various topical issues and appeal to authorities and society on behalf of our faithful. The Patriarch is the Honorary Chairman of this organisation. Metropolitan Anthony of Volokolamsk represents Orthodox Christians in the Council’s Presidium. Muslims are represented by the heads of the major Muslims’ Spiritual Boards, including the Mufti of Tatarstan and the head of the Muslim Coordinating Centre for the North Caucasus.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Why does the Russian Orthodox Church maintain such close relations with the Muslim Ummah in and outside Russia?</strong> <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">Because our fundamental values are alike. Orthodox Christians and Muslims strive to act according to God’s will. It is an essential principle of OUR life</u></strong>. We are conservative in a good way, for Orthodox Christians and Muslims resolutely reject any attempts to make sin a social norm. For us the unnatural confusion of the sexes and the so-called LGBT ideology are absolutely unacceptable. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">We seek to preserve traditional, God-commanded form of family</strong>. Whatever is used to justify the egoistic attitude to people and to the world, it is evident that it substitutes serving God for serving one’s passions, which turns a person into a prisoner of his or her own vices.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Faithful to our spiritual ideals, we can work together in opposing the sophisticated propaganda of individualism and the worship of the human being. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Orthodox Christians and Muslims are called to uphold their moral values, live up to the ideals of good, love, mercy, justice and mutual respect.</strong> <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">WE, Christians and Muslims, know and confess that God is the true Creator of the world and the Only Lawmaker</u>. Where God is forgotten, there evil reigns</strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">A great Russian writer whose influence on our self-awareness was enormous – Fyodor Dostoevsky – expressed this simple but profound idea: If there is now God, then everything is permitted. “If there is no God, then I am god,” says one of the characters, Alexei Kirillov, in his novel <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Demons</em>. The origin of such thought pattern goes back to the Renaissance period in the European history. However, misinterpreted, freedom made humans slaves of their own passions. And what today is coming to various countries under the guise of freedom is destruction and chaos.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">I have stated this many times and will say it again – the 21st century’s main challenge comes from the godless secular world and is posed to the traditional system of values rooted in religion. To oppose it, we need to ensure consolidation of those forces in society that are committed to their traditions. If we do not wish to see the victory of evil and the development of a universal cult of sin and egoism, then we should give to this challenge a spiritual rebuff, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">for our joint efforts can save the world from self-destruction. In this respect Christians and Muslims have sufficient potential – religious, cultural, human, intellectual and economic</strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">To conclude my speech, I would like to express hope that Russia and the Islamic world will develop and broaden their cooperation. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">The Russian Orthodox Church, which represents the interests of millions of its faithful, is ready TO PROMOTE IT in all possible ways and to exchange experience and knowledge</u></strong>. I believe that today, amid the crisis in international relations, a new possibility is unfolding for us to influence the global agenda so that preservation of the intransient moral values could become one of its primary concerns.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">I wish you all successful work.<br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/><br style="box-sizing: inherit;"/>Thank you for your attention. (Emphasis mine)</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">So here we have the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church claiming that Muslims and Eastern Orthodox serve the same true God and seek to carry out his will. The Patriarch even calls the religious leaders of the Muslim and Jewish communities his brothers.</p></div>

</div>
