# Eastern Orthodox on Islam, Judaism & Other Churches

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/eastern-orthodox-on-islam-judaism-other.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-2576024696683620856" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><header class="entry-header" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 14px;'><h1 class="entry-title" style='box-sizing: inherit; clear: both; color: #444444; font-family: "Open Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 1.4; margin: 0px 0px 1.1rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'>Eastern Orthodox on Islam, Judaism &amp; Other Churches</h1></header><div class="entry-content" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; counter-reset: footnotes 0; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 0px 0px 1.1em;">The statements cited here are taken from <a href="https://www.goarch.org/social-ethos" rel="noreferrer noopener" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;" target="_blank"><em style="box-sizing: inherit;">For the Life of the World: Toward A Social Ethos of the Orthodox Church</em></a>, published by Holy Cross Orthodox Press in 2020. The document can be accessed at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America website: <a href="https://www.goarch.org/social-ethos" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">Social Ethos Document</a>. Here is the <a href="https://www.goarch.org/documents/32058/5149465/For+the+Life+of+World.pdf/e083c1df-48fe-84a9-75a2-7e8b2516bf36?t=1709818877311" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;">PDF Version</a>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">The readers will see that according to this document the Greek or Eastern Orthodox (EO) do believe and affirm that Muslims and Jews are worshiping the same God as acknowledged by the EO. In fact, the document goes so far as to say that all the people of the world are worshiping the same God and that there are truths in all these religions including those from India and China, which most definitely include Hinduism and Buddhism!  </p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">These references all come from the section titled,</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">I. Ecumenical Relations and Relations with Other Faiths</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;"><em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Let us pray for the unity of all</em></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">All emphasis will be mine.  </p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§55 God is Father of all the families of the heavens and the earth. God’s Logos pervades all things, and all things were created through his Logos. God’s Spirit is everywhere, enlightening and enlivening all of reality. Thus creation universally declares the power, wisdom, and grace of its maker, while at all times and in all places God is present to those who seek the truth. The Orthodox Church exists as the concrete reality of Christ’s mystical body in time,  always bearing witness to <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ</em>. It is for this reason that the Church not only reaches out and witnesses to Orthodoxy to various Christian confessions, with whom the Orthodox Church enjoys historic dialogue, but also reaches outward to meet non-Christian religions and faith communities that are open to the truth and the call of God. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">In this regard, it also affirms, <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">and has done so since the earliest centuries of the faith</u>, that God’s Logos shines forth in the whole frame of the created world and speaks to all hearts in the still small voice of conscience, and that wherever truth is revered the Spirit of God is at work. St. Justin Martyr, for instance, declared that knowledge of God’s Logos had been imparted by God not only to the children of Israel, <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">but to the Greek philosophers who had never known Christ, and to all peoples, inasmuch as seeds of the eternal Logos have been planted in all human beings</u>; thus, he says, all who have lived in harmony with this Logos <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">are already in some sense Christians</u>, while Christians may claim as their own any and every truth known to the nations of the earth by God’s inspiration</strong>.<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">50</span> <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">According to St. Maximus the Confessor</u>, the primordial <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">logoi </em>underlying and indwelling all things reside in the one Logos of God, and find their historical center in Christ</strong>.<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">51</span> The Church knows, moreover, that the full mystery of God’s Logos transcends human comprehension, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">and communicates itself in ways too numerous and wonderful to calculate or conceive. The Church thus seeks dialogue with other religious traditions not out of any desire to alter the deposit of its faith, much less out of any anxiety regarding that deposit’s sufficiency, but out of a reverent love for all who seek God and his goodness, and in a firm certitude <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">that God has left no people without a share in the knowledge of his glory and grace</u></strong>. This is not to deny, of course, that there are many irreconcilable differences between the Church’s understanding of the truth and that of other religious traditions, and it certainly has no desire to obscure this reality. It seeks neither to make compromises regarding her own essential beliefs <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">nor condescendingly to treat those of other faiths as inconsequential</u></strong>. At the same time, knowing that God reveals himself in countless ways and with boundless inventiveness, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">the Church enters into dialogue with other faiths prepared to be amazed and delighted by the variety and beauty of God’s generous manifestations of divine goodness, grace, and wisdom among all peoples</u></strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§56 Though the Orthodox Church seeks deeper bonds of amity with all faiths, it recognizes her unique responsibility with regard to the other two “peoples of the book,” the Abrahamic traditions of Islam and Judaism, with which it has longstanding dialogues and alongside which it has lived for millennia. Therefore, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">the Church can and does engage the beauty and spiritual truths of Islam in all its multiple traditions, acknowledging points of contact with it especially in its affirmation of the Virgin Birth (Quran 3:47, 19:16-21, 21:91) and its recognition of Jesus as the Messiah, Messenger, Word, and Spirit of God (4:171)</strong>. Although Orthodoxy cannot agree with Islam in its rejection of the Incarnation and of God as Trinity, it is nevertheless able to pursue meaningful dialogue with all parts of the Islamic Ummah regarding the proper understanding of these central Christian teachings. It believes that the common roots of Christianity and Islam in the Middle East, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">the common affirmation of the message of the unity of God, as well as the common recognition of the holiness and truth of God’s Word and his Prophets</u></strong>, the importance of prayer and ascesis, as well as the struggle to discern the will of God in all things, invite Islam and Orthodoxy to enter into an intimate conversation for the advancement of peace and understanding among all peoples.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§57 As to Judaism, when the eternal Son of God became human he became incarnate as a Jew, born within the body of Israel, an heir to God’s covenants with his chosen people. He came in fulfillment of God’s saving promises to his people, as the Messiah of Israel. The first blood he shed for the redemption of the world was exacted on the day of his circumcision; his first confession before the world concerning the justice of God was in the synagogue, as was the first declaration of his mission to the world (Luke 4:18–21); his ministry resumed the language of the great prophets of Israel; and he was executed by a pagan authority under the title “King of the Jews.” It was to Israel that God declared himself as The One Who Is, to Israel that God gave the Law as a language of love and communion, with Israel that God established an everlasting covenant, and to Israel that he proclaimed, “I will bless those who bless you and curse those who curse you, and in you shall all the families of the earth be blessed” (Genesis 12:3). As the Apostle Paul emphasized, Christians are saved in Christ only in being grafted like wild olive branches into the cultivated olive tree of Israel, and the branches do not support—but rather are supported by—the root (Romans 11:16–24). Orthodox Christians look to the Jewish communities throughout the world not merely as to practitioners of another creed, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">but as to, in some sense, their spiritual elders in the history of God’s saving revelations, and as to the guardians of that precious inheritance that is the first full manifestation of God’s saving presence in history</strong>. It is, sadly, necessary to state these things with a special emphasis at this moment. In recent years, we have witnessed a revival in many quarters of the Western world of the most insidious ideologies of national, religious, and even racial identity in general, and of anti-Semitic movements in particular. Bigotry and violence against Jews have long been a conspicuous evil of the cultures of Christendom; the greatest systematic campaign of mass murder and attempted genocide in European history was undertaken against the Jews of Europe; and—while some Orthodox clergy and laity demonstrated exceptional generosity and even sacrificial compassion to their Jewish brothers and sisters, earning from them the honorific “righteous among the nations”—<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">other historically Orthodox nations have dark histories of anti-Semitic violence and oppression. For all these evils, Christians must seek God’s forgiveness</u></strong>. In expiation for those crimes against the Jewish people <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">specifically committed in Orthodox lands, the Church seeks both God’s forgiveness as well as a deeper relation of love and regard with Jewish communities and the Jewish faith</strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§58 The story of other non-Orthodox Christian religious traditions is not yet finished, and Orthodoxy affirms that like other non-Orthodox Christian bodies they only find their coherence and clarity within the Orthodox Church. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">As for other religions, the Orthodox Church takes encouragement from the words of the Apostle Paul to the Athenians at the Areopagus: “What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you”</strong> (Acts 17:23). From this the Church is given license to proclaim <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">that the true God in whom all humanity lives and moves and has its being <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">is worshipped by peoples everywhere, Christian and non-Christian alike</u></strong>. And this makes her only more eager to make all persons and peoples aware that the face of this one true God shines forth unobscured in the face of Jesus Christ. Moreover, the Church—illumined by that radiance—<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">enters into dialogue with other faiths fully prepared to be instructed by many of their own speculative, cultural, and spiritual achievements</u></strong>. It may be that, just as the Church of the early centuries profited from <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">and in time baptized many of the philosophical, religious, and cultural riches of pre-Christian Europe, Asia Minor, and the Near East</strong>, so too may it now discover new ways of articulating the deposit of faith or new ways of thinking about its cultural expressions and conceptual forms <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">by exposure to, say, the great philosophies and faiths OF INDIA, or to the traditions OF CHINA and the greater FAR EAST, or to the spiritual experiences of tribal peoples throughout the world, and so on</u></strong>. Again, as Justin Martyr insisted, whatsoever is true and godly is welcome to us, for the Logos is everywhere and shines forth in all places.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">50 Justin, First <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Apology</em> 46. PG6.397B. And <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Second Apology</em> 8, 10, and 13. PG 6.457A, 460B, and 465B.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">51 Maximus, <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Ambiguum</em> 7. PG 91.1081C. See <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">On Difficulties in the Church Fathers</em>, vol. 1, 75–141.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">And this is what the document states in respect to the other ancient Apostolic Churches:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§52 Though visible sacramental unity among all Christians is at present only a remote hope, nothing lies beyond the power of God’s Spirit, and the Church cannot relent in her labors to achieve a final reunion of all who come together in Christ’s name. Until that day, so long as their hearts and minds are open to the promptings of God’s Word and Spirit, Christians of all communions can meet together in love and work together for the transformation of the world. In particular, they can cooperate with one another in works of charity, thereby making God’s love manifest to the world, and in efforts to advance social and civil justice, thereby proclaiming God’s righteousness and peace to all peoples. Moreover, even if they cannot as yet enjoy perfect communion in the full sacramental life of the Church, all Christians are called by their baptism in the Holy Trinity to gather together in prayer, to repent of past misunderstandings and offences against their brothers and sisters, and to love one another as fellow servants and heirs of the Kingdom of God. <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">By this, all shall know that you are my disciples: if you have love for one another</em> (John 13:35).</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§53 The Orthodox Church enjoys especially close relations <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">with those <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">communions that are directly descended from the ancient Apostolic Church</u> and that share something like her understanding of the apostolic charism of episcopal succession and something like her sacramental theology: the ancient churches of Egypt and Ethiopia, of Armenia, <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">of the Assyrian tradition, of Canterbury, and of Rome</u></strong>. Thus, the Church has important bilateral dialogues with the Roman Catholic Church and the Anglican Communion, and it prays that these dialogues may bear fruit in a complete unity with the Church. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">But all Christian communions are her kin and her love for all is equally unqualified</u></strong>. For more than a century, then, the Orthodox Church has played a leading role in the movement towards Christian unity, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">out of obedience to our Lord’s supplication and exhortation <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">that all may be one</em> (John 17:21)</strong>. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">The Ecumenical Patriarchate, in particular, has been at the forefront of the Orthodox engagement with Christians of other communions</strong>, and has remained a steadfast participant in numerous bilateral and multi-lateral dialogues with other major Christian churches. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">The Ecumenical Patriarchate was, in fact, one of the founding members of the World Council of Churches, and has continuously maintained an official representative presence at that council’s central offices</u></strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">§54 In short, the Church is dedicated to a sustained dialogue with other Christians. Dialogue, in the Orthodox understanding, is essentially and primordially a reflection of the dialogue between God and humanity: it is initiated by God and conducted through the divine Logos (<em style="box-sizing: inherit;">dia-logos</em>), our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Pervading all human life, dialogue takes place in all our encounters, personal, social, or political, and must always be extended to those who adhere to religions different from ours. And in all our connections and relationships, the Word of God is mystically present, ever guiding our exchange of words and ideas towards a spiritual union of hearts in him. Naturally, the Orthodox Church considers itself responsible always to interpret other traditions and perspectives in terms of what was revealed to it by God. In so doing, it is open to <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is pleasing, whatever is commendable</em> (Philippians 4:8), and is ready to rejoice whenever it discovers these in her partners of dialogue. Our commitment to ecumenical relations with other Christian confessions reflects this openness to all who sincerely seek the truth as the incarnate Logos, Jesus Christ, and who remain true to their conscience, even while we continue to bear witness to the fullness of the Christian faith in the Orthodox Church. Moreover, the Church can stand with other Christians in this way not only out of solidarity in light of a shared history and moral vision, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">but also because such Christian groups, through their Trinitarian baptism and confession of the faith of the Councils</u></strong>, profess and share many aspects of Orthodox teaching and tradition.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">The readers should pay careful attention to the document unashamedly highlighting the fact that the Ecumenical Patriarchate of the EO was one of the founding members of the World Council of Churches!</p></div>

</div>
