# Patriarch Timothy I on Muhammad

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/patriarch-timothy-i-on-muhammad.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-4901442731084667555" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><header class="entry-header" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 14px;'><h1 class="entry-title" style='box-sizing: inherit; clear: both; color: #444444; font-family: "Open Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 1.4; margin: 0px 0px 1.1rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'>Patriarch Timothy I on Muhammad</h1></header><div class="entry-content" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; counter-reset: footnotes 0; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 0px 0px 1.1em;">The following excerpt is taken from<a href="https://archive.org/details/apologyoftimothy00timo" style="background-color: transparent; border-bottom: 1px dotted rgb(170, 170, 170); box-sizing: inherit; color: #444444; text-decoration-line: none;"> The apology of Timothy the Patriarch before the Caliph Mahdi</a>, translated by Alphonse Mingana, published by Manchester University Press, England, 1928, pp. 196-198. Timothy I (AD 780-823) was the Patriarch of the Assyrian Church of the East who made an apology for the Christian faith to the third Abbasid Caliph Mahdi.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">The brilliance of the Patriarch can be seen from the fact that though he praises Muhammad before the caliph, he made sure to never call him a prophet. Instead, he simply affirmed that Muhammad walked in the path of the prophets. All emphasis will be mine</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">The Questions and Answers of the Second Day.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">The next<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">1</span> day I had an audience of his Majesty. Such audiences had constantly taken place previously, sometimes for the affairs of the State, and some other times for the love of wisdom and learning which was burning in the soul of his Majesty. He is a lovable man, and loves also learning when he finds it in other people, and on this account he directed against me the weight of his objections, whenever necessary. After I had paid to him my usual respects as King of Kings, he began to address me and converse with me not in a harsh and haughty tone, since harshness and haughtiness are remote from his soul, but in a sweet and benevolent way.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">And our King of Kings said to me: “O Catholicos, did you bring a Gospel with you, as 1 had asked you?” — And I replied to his exalted Majesty: “1 have brought one, O our victorious and God-loving King.” — And our victorious Sovereign said to me: “Who gave you this Book?” — And I replied to him: “It is the Word of God that gave us the Gospel, O our God-loving King.” — And our King said: “Was it not written -by four Apostles?”<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">2</span> And I replied to him: “It was written by four Apostles, as our King has said, but not out of their own heads, but out of what they heard and learned from the Word-God. If then the Gospel was written by the Apostles, and if the Apostles simply wrote what they heard and learned from the Word-God, the Gospel has, therefore, been given in reality by the Word-God. Similarly, the Torah was written by Moses, but since Moses heard and learned it from an angel, and the angel heard and learned it from God, we assert that the Torah was given by God and not by Moses.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“In the same way also the Muslims say that they have received the Kur’an from Muhammad, but since Muhammad received knowledge and writing from an angel, they, therefore, affirm that the Book that was divulged through him was not Muhammad’s or the angel’s but God’s. So also we Christians believe that although the Gospel was given to us by the Apostles, it was not given as from them but as from God, His Word and His Spirit. Further, the letters and official documents<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">1</span> of your Majesty are written by the hands of scribes and clerks, but they are not said to be those of scribes, but those of your Majesty, and of the Commander of the Faithful.”</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">And our gracious and wise King said to me: “What do you say about Muhammad?” — And I replied to his Majesty: “<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Muhammad is worthy of all praise, by all reasonable people, O my Sovereign. <u style="box-sizing: inherit;">He walked in the path of the prophets</u>, and trod in the track of the lovers of God</strong>. All the prophets taught the doctrine of one God, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">and since Muhammad taught the doctrine of the unity of God, he walked, therefore, in the path of the prophets</u></strong>. Further, all the prophets drove men away from bad works, and brought them nearer to good works, and since Muhammad drove his people away from bad works and brought them nearer to the good ones, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">he walked, therefore, in the path of the prophets</u></strong>. Again, all the prophets separated men from idolatry and polytheism, and attached them to God and to His cult, and since Muhammad separated his people from idolatry and polytheism, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">and attached them to the cult and the knowledge of one God, beside whom there is no other God, it is obvious that he walked in the path of the prophets</u></strong>. Finally Muhammad taught, about God, His Word and His Spirit, and since all the prophets had prophesied about God, His Word and His Spirit, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"><u style="box-sizing: inherit;">Muhammad walked, therefore, in the path of all the prophets</u></strong>.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">Who will not praise, honour and exalt the one who not only fought for God in words, but showed also his zeal for Him in the sword?</strong> As Moses did with the Children of Israel when he saw that they had fashioned a golden calf which they worshipped, and killed all of those who were worshipping it, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">so also Muhammad evinced an ardent zeal towards God, and loved and honoured Him more than his own soul, his people and his relatives</strong>. He praised, honoured and exalted those who worshipped God with him, and promised them kingdom, praise and honour from God, both in this world and in the world to come in the Garden.<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">2</span> But those who worshipped idols and not God he fought and opposed, and showed to them the torments of hell and of the fire which is never quenched and in which all evildoers burn eternally.</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">“And what Abraham, that friend and beloved of God, did in turning his face from idols and from his kinsmen, and looking only towards one God and becoming the preacher of one God to other peoples, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">this also Muhammad did. He turned his face from idols and their worshippers, whether those idols were those of his own kinsmen or of strangers, and he honoured and worshipped only one God. Because of this God honoured him exceedingly and brought low<span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">1</span> before his feet two powerful kingdoms which roared in the world like a lion and made the voice of their authority heard in all the earth that is below heaven like thunder, viz: the Kingdom of the Persians and that of the Romans</strong>. The former kingdom, that is to say the Kingdom of the Persians, worshipped the creatures instead of the Creator, and the latter, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">that is to say the Kingdom of the Romans, attributed suffering and death in the flesh to the one who cannot suffer and die in any way and through any process.</strong><span style="box-sizing: inherit; font-size: 13.5px; line-height: 0; position: relative; top: -0.5em; vertical-align: baseline;">2</span> He further extended the power of his authority through the Commander of the Faithful and his children from east to west, and from north to south. Who will not praise, O our victorious King, the one whom God has praised, and will not weave a crown of glory and majesty to the one whom God has glorified and exalted? <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">These and similar things I and all God-lovers utter about Muhammad, O my sovereign</strong>.”</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">And our King said to me: “You should, therefore, accept the words of the Prophet.” — And I replied to his gracious Majesty: “Which words of his our victorious King believes that I must accept?” — And our King said to me: “That God is one and that there is no other one besides Him.” — And I replied: “This belief in one God, O my Sovereign, I have learned from the Torah, from the Prophets and from the Gospel. I stand by it and shall die in it.” — And our victorious King said to me: “You believe in one God, as you said, but one in three.” — And I answered his sentence: “I do not deny that I believe in one God in three, and three in one, but not in three different Godheads, however, but in the persons of God’s Word and His Spirit. I believe that these three constitute one God, not in their person but in their nature. 1 have shown how in my previous words.”</p></div>

</div>
