# Muhammad’s Jewish Sex-Slave

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/muhammads-jewish-sex-slave.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-5428677879291876297" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><header class="entry-header" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 14px;'><h1 class="entry-title" style='box-sizing: inherit; clear: both; color: #444444; font-family: "Open Sans", sans-serif; font-size: 2.25rem; line-height: 1.4; margin: 0px 0px 1.1rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><span style='color: #555555; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem;'>According to the Sunni traditions, Muhammad had at least two sex slaves that he did not marry, namely, a Christian Coptic girl named Mariyah and a Jewish concubine named Rayhanah. I have written at length about Mariyah, so here I will focus on Rayhanah.</span></h1></header><div class="entry-content" style='background-color: white; box-sizing: inherit; color: #555555; counter-reset: footnotes 0; font-family: "Source Sans Pro", sans-serif; font-size: 1.125rem; overflow-wrap: break-word;'><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Here is what a modern biography on Muhammad, which is based on the earliest surviving Islamic sources, writes in respect to this Jewish girl whom Muhammad had taken captive and enslaved:</p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">As to the other women and children, they were divided, together with the property, amongst the men who had taken part in the siege. Many of these captives were ransomed by the Bani Nadir at Khaybar. As part of his share the Prophet had chosen Rayhanah, the daughter of Zayd, a Nadirite, who married her to a man of Qurayzah. <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">She was a woman of great beauty and she remained the Prophet’s slave until she died some five years later</strong>. At first he put her in the care of his aunt Salma, in whose house Rifa‘ah had already taken refuge. Rayhanah herself was averse to entering Islam, but Rifa‘ah, and his kinsmen of the Bani Hadl spoke to her about the new religion and it was not long before one of the three young converts, Tha‘labah by name, came to the Prophet and told him that Rayhanah had entered Islam, whereupon he greatly rejoiced. When it became clear that she was not pregnant, <strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;">he went to her and offered to set her free and to make her his wife</strong>. But she said: “O Messenger if God, leave me in thy power; that will be easier for me and for thee.” (Martin Lings, <em style="box-sizing: inherit;">Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources</em> [Inner Traditions International, Ltd., One Park Street, Rochester, Vermont 05767; 1983], p. 233; emphasis mine)<strong style="box-sizing: inherit; font-weight: bold;"></strong></p><p style="box-sizing: inherit; margin: 1em 0px 1.1em;">Even the Muslim writings are not able to hide the fact of Muhammad being a vile, immoral, sexual deviant.  </p></div>

</div>
