# Muhammad’s Inconsistencies

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/09/muhammads-inconsistencies.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-6407451784891205074" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> </p><div class="csc-header csc-header-n1"><h1 class="csc-firstHeader" style="font-size: 1.2em; text-align: center;">More of Muhammad’s Inconsistencies –</h1></div><p class="align-center" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; text-align: center;"><b>Doing to others what he didn’t want to be done to him</b></p><p class="align-center" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; text-align: center;"><span style="text-align: justify;">It comes as no surprise to those who have studied the life of Muhammad with any depth that he was someone that was grossly inconsistent since he failed to practice what he preached, and gave himself certain privileges and favors which he withheld from others. Muhammad was also guilty of doing to others what he did not anyone to do to either himself or his followers.</span></p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">For example, when a man came to Muhammad to ask him permission to fornicate, or have sex with women, the latter asked him a series of questions in order to highlight just how perverted and selfish his request truly was:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">“… Imam Ahmad recorded Abu Umamah saying that a young man came to the Prophet and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Give me permission to commit <i>Zina </i>(unlawful sex).’ The people surrounded him and rebuked him, saying, ‘Stop! Stop!’ But the Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Come close.&gt;&gt;</i> The young man came to him, and he said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Sit down.&gt;&gt;</i> so he sat down. The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Would you like it (unlawful sex) for your mother?&gt;&gt;</i> He said, ‘No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.’ The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Neither do the people like it for their mothers.&gt;&gt;</i> The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Would you like it for your daughter?&gt;&gt;</i> He said, ‘No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.’ The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Neither do the people like it for their daughters.&gt;&gt;</i> The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Would you like it for your sister?&gt;&gt;</i> He said, ‘No, by Allah, may I be ransomed for you.’ The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Neither do the people like it for their sisters.&gt;&gt;</i> The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Would you like it for your paternal aunt?&gt;&gt;</i> He said, ‘No, by Allah, O Allah's Messenger! may I be ransomed for you.’ The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Neither do the people like it for their paternal aunts.&gt;&gt;</i> The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Would you like it for your maternal aunt?&gt;&gt;</i> He said, ‘No, by Allah, O Allah's Messenger! may I be ransomed for you.’ The Prophet said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;Neither do the people like it for their maternal aunts.&gt;&gt;</i> Then the Prophet put his hand on him and said…</p><p class="bodytext"><i>&lt;&lt;O Allah, forgive his sin, purify his heart and guard his chastity.&gt;&gt;</i> After that the young man never paid attention to anything of that nature.” (<i>Tafsir</i>, <a class="external-link-new-window" href="http://www.qtafsir.com/index.php?option=com_content&amp;task=view&amp;id=2827&amp;Itemid=72" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;" title="Opens external link in new window">Q. 17:32</a>)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">What makes this advice rather troubling is that Muhammad did not practice it himself, nor did his followers, since he permitted them to take women captive and have sex with them, even married ones whose husbands were still alive!</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Also (prohibited are) women already married, <b>except those whom your right hands possess</b>: Thus hath God ordained (Prohibitions) against you: Except for these, all others are lawful, provided ye seek (them in marriage) with gifts from your property, - desiring chastity, not lust, seeing that ye derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at least) as prescribed; but if, after a dower is prescribed, agree Mutually (to vary it), there is no blame on you, and God is All-knowing, All-wise. S. 4:24 Y. Ali</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">As shocking as it may sound, this passage is basically stating that the only time a Muslim man (which includes Muhammad) can sleep with a married woman is when she happens to be one of the female slaves that he has taken captive!</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">Unfortunately, this verse was tragically and shamefully put into practice by the jihadists:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Abu Sirma said to Abu Sa'id al Khadri: O Abu Sa'id, did you hear Allah's Messenger mentioning al-'azl? He said: Yes, and added: We went out with Allah's Messenger on the expedition to the Bi'l-Mustaliq <b>and took captive some excellent Arab women; and we desired them, for we were suffering from the absence of our wives, (but at the same time) we also desired ransom for them</b>. <b>So we decided to have sexual intercourse with them but by observing 'azl (Withdrawing the male sexual organ before emission of semen to avoid conception).</b> But we said: We are doing an act whereas Allah's Messenger is amongst us; why not ask him? So we asked Allah's Messenger, and he said: It does not matter if you do not do it, for every soul that is to be born up to the Day of Resurrection will be born. (<i>Sahih Muslim</i>, Book 008, <a class="external-link-new-window" href="http://www.searchtruth.com/book_display.php?book=008&amp;translator=2&amp;start=0&amp;number=3371" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;" title="Opens external link in new window">Number 3371</a>)</p><p class="bodytext">Abu Said al-Khudri said: The apostle of Allah sent a military expedition to Awtas on the occasion of the battle of Hunain. They met their enemy and fought with them. They defeated them and took them captives. Some of the Companions of the Apostle of Allah <b>were reluctant to have intercourse with the female captives in the presence of their husbands who were unbelievers.</b> So Allah, the Exalted, sent down the Quranic verse, ‘And all married women (are forbidden) unto you save those (captives) whom your right hands possess’. That is to say, they are lawful for them when they complete their waiting period. (<i>Sunan Abu Dawud</i>, Volume 2, Number 2150)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">How unfortunate that Muhammad and his deity did not share the shame and concern of their followers regarding the morality of raping captives whose husbands were still alive, but actually rushed in to compose a text to justify such a wicked and perverted act!</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">This same narration is found in all of the major hadith collections:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext"><b>Chapter 36. What Has Been Related (About A Man) Who Captures A Slave Woman That Has A Husband, Is It Lawful For Him To Have Relations With Her?</b></p><p class="bodytext"><b>1132. </b>Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri narrated: We got some captives on the day of Awtas, and they had husbands among their people. They mentioned that to the Messenger of Allah, <u>so the following was revealed: And women who are already married, except those whom your right hands possess</u>. <b>(<i>Hasan</i>)</b> (<i>English Translation of Jami‘ At-Tirmidhi, Compiled by Imam Hafiz Abu ‘Eisa Mohammad Ibn ‘Eisa At-Tirmidhi, From Hadith No. 544 to 1204</i>, translated by Abu Khaliyl (USA), ahadith edited and referenced by Hafiz Tahir Zubair ‘Ali Za’i [Darussalam Publishers &amp; Distributors, First Edition: November 2007], Volume 2, p. 502; underline emphasis ours)</p><p class="bodytext"><b>(3) 3016. </b>Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “On the Day of Awtas, we captured some women who had husbands among the idolaters. <u>SO SOME OF THE MEN DISLIKED THAT, so Allah, Most High, revealed</u>: ‘And women already married, except those whom your right hands possess….’” <b>(Sahih)</b></p><p class="bodytext">[Abu ‘Eisa said:] This Hadith is Hasan.</p><p class="bodytext"><b>(4) 3017. </b>Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri said: “we captured some women on the Day of Awtas and they had husbands among their people. That was mentioned to the Messenger of Allah <u>so Allah revealed</u>: ‘…And women already married, except those whom your right hands possess….” <b>(Sahih)</b></p><p class="bodytext">[Abu ‘Eisa said:] This Hadith is Hasan.</p><p class="bodytext">This is how it was reported by Ath-Thawri, from ‘Uthman Al-Batti, from Abu Al-Khalil, from Abu Sa‘eed Al-Khudri from the Prophet and it is similar. “From Abu ‘Alqamah” is not in this Hadith and I do not know of anyone who mentioned Abu ‘Alqamah in this Hadith except in what Hammam mentioned from Qatadah. Abu Al-Khalil’s name is Salih bin Abi Mariam. (<i>Jami‘ At-Tirmidhi</i>, Volume 5, From Hadith No. 2606 to 3290, Chapter 4. Regarding Surat<i> An-Nisa’</i>, pp. 331-332; capital and underline emphasis ours)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">To make matters worse, Muhammad granted his men permission to marry women for a short period of time for the sole purpose of gratifying their sexual cravings:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Narrated Jabir bin ‘Abdullah and Salama bin Al-Akwa': While we were in an army, Allah's Apostle came to us and said, "You have been allowed to do the Mut’a (marriage), so do it." Salama bin Al-Akwa' said: Allah's Apostle's said, "<b>If a man and a woman agree (to marry temporarily), their marriage should last for three nights, and if they like to continue, they can do so; and if they want to separate, they can do so."</b> I do not know whether that was only for us or for all the people in general. Abu Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said: ‘Ali made it clear that the Prophet said, "<b>The Mut’a marriage has been cancelled (made unlawful)</b>." (<i>Sahih al-Bukhari</i>, Volume 7, Book 62, <a href="http://www.searchtruth.com/book_display.php?book=62&amp;translator=1&amp;start=0&amp;number=52" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;">Number 52</a>)</p></div><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Narrated Abdullah:<br/>We used to participate in the holy battles led by Allah's Apostle and we had nothing (no wives) with us. So we said, "Shall we get ourselves castrated?" He forbade us that <b>and then allowed us to marry women with a temporary contract and recited to us</b>: -- ‘O you who believe! Make not unlawful the good things which Allah has made lawful for you, but commit no transgression.’ (5.87) (<i>Sahih al-Bukhari</i>, Volume 7, Book 62, <a class="external-link-new-window" href="http://www.searchtruth.com/book_display.php?book=62&amp;translator=1&amp;start=0&amp;number=13" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;" title="Opens external link in new window">Number 13o</a>)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">This practice continued to be observed until the time of Umar’s caliphate:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Ibn Uraij reported: 'Ati' reported that Jabir b. Abdullah came to perform 'Umra, and we came to his abode, and the people asked him about different things, and then they made a mention of temporary marriage, whereupon he said: <b>Yes, we had been benefiting ourselves by this temporary marriage during the lifetime of the Holy Prophet and during the time of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar</b>. (<i>Sahih Muslim</i>, Book 008, <a class="external-link-new-window" href="http://www.searchtruth.com/book_display.php?book=008&amp;translator=2&amp;start=0&amp;number=3248" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;" title="Opens external link in new window">Number 3248</a>)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">Tragically, there were some instances in which women got pregnant through such unions:</p><div class="indent" style="margin-left: 5mm; margin-right: 5mm; text-align: justify;"><p class="bodytext">Yahya related to me from Malik from Ibn Shihab from Urwa ibn az-Zubayr that Khawla ibn Hakim came to Umar ibn al-Khattab and said, "<b><u>Rabia ibn Umayya made a temporary marriage with a woman and she is pregnant by him</u></b>." Umar ibn al-Khattab went out in dismay dragging his cloak, saying, "This temporary marriage, had I come across it, I would have ordered stoning and done away with it!" (<i>Malik’s Muwatta</i>, Book 28, <a class="external-link-new-window" href="http://www.searchtruth.com/book_display.php?book=28&amp;translator=4&amp;start=0&amp;number=28.18.42" style="color: #003399; font-weight: bold; text-decoration-line: none;" title="Opens external link in new window">Number 28.18.42</a>)</p></div><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">Today such a practice would be called prostitution, plain and simple.</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">With the foregoing in view, it is obvious that Muhammad and his followers did to other people’s mothers, wives, daughters, nieces, aunts etc., the very thing that he did not want to be done to the mothers, wives, daughters, nieces, aunts etc. of Muslims.</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">In light of this, we would like to ask the followers of Muhammad the very same questions that their prophet asked the young man.</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">Would the Muslims like it if someone contracted temporary marriage with their mothers? What about with their daughters, sisters, paternal or maternal aunts? How about their grandmothers, granddaughters, female cousins, nieces etc.?</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">Moreover, would the Muslims be okay with a group of invaders coming to their lands and taking their women captive in order to have sex with them? And would they be perfectly all right with such men taking their wives and having sex with them before selling them off to someone else (or even keeping them as their own personal property)?</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">If the Muslims would have a problem with all of this then why do they follow a man who permitted his hordes to basically rape captive women, including married ones whose husbands were still alive? And why would they want to believe in a man who virtually allowed women to be treated like prostitutes by permitting his followers to contract temporary marriages whose only objective was to satisfy the carnal, lustful desires of men who didn’t have the will power to control their sexual urges?</p><p class="bodytext" style="text-align: justify;">The fact is that Muhammad stands condemned by his own teachings and Muslims should therefore abandon such a man and turn to the risen Lord Jesus who is their only hope of salvation and eternal bliss.</p>

</div>
