# THE NIGHT MUHAMMAD INTERACTED WITH JINNS IS AGAISNT THE HOLY GOD

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/07/the-night-muhammad-interacted-with.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-2985484626119761933" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p>Our Prophet's Akhlaq</p><p> » When Jinns Embraced Islam</p><p>Our Prophet's</p><p>akhlaq</p><p>"And you are truly ˹a man˺ of outstanding character"</p><p>[Surah Al-Qalam 68:4]</p><p>When Jinns Embraced Islam</p><p>By: Shaikh Zafar Ul Hasan Al Madani</p><p>He is known as Mabloos ilasakhlain (Chosen for two heavy creations)</p><p>Prophet Mohammed ﷺ is the Prophet for human-kind as well as Jinns.</p><p><br/></p><p>There are two places where Qur’an mentions communication between the Prophet ﷺ and the Jinns.</p><p><br/></p><p>In Surah al-Jinn, Allah reveals that the Jinn, too, listened to the communications of the Prophet Muhammad ﷺ and the Qur'an, and that some of them accepted Deen and became Muslims. One verse on the subject reads:</p><p><br/></p><p>Say: "It has been revealed to me that a band of the jinn listened and said, 'We have heard a most amazing Recitation. It leads to right guidance so we believe in it and will not associate anyone with our Lord.'" Surah al-Jinn: 1-2</p><p>In that same Surah, Allah also reveals that some Jinn are actually Muslims:</p><p><br/></p><p>[The Jinn said]: "And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. Anyone who believes in his Lord need fear neither belittlement nor tyranny. Some of us are Muslims and some are deviators. Those who have become Muslim are those who sought right guidance." Surah al-Jinn: 13-14</p><p>When the servant of Allah stands calling on Him, they almost swarm all over him. Surah al-Jinn: 19</p><p>Yet another verse recounts that when the Prophet ﷺ gave guidance regarding Deen, the jinn would gather around him and listen carefully:</p><p><br/></p><p>And [mention, O Muhammad], when We directed to you a few of the jinn, listening to the Qur'an. And when they attended it, they said, "Listen quietly." And when it was concluded, they went back to their people as warners. Surah Ah’kaf- 29</p><p>These verses make it clear that Prophet Muhammad ﷺ was sent as a Prophet for all mankind and the jinn. The Qur'an is a guide for both mankind and the Jinn.</p><p><br/></p><p>When the Jinns invited the Prophet ﷺ to their colony</p><p>Once the Prophet ﷺ visited Taif to invite the people to Islam. He wanted to talk to the people of the town to invite them to Islam but they all shut their doors on his face and rejected him. Zaid bin Haris (May Allah be pleased with him) was his Companion. Both of them went to their leader, who rejected them as well. He asked his slaves and young boys to drive them away.. They threw stones at them to drive them out of the town. Both of them were injured. Our Prophet ﷺ bled so much that his shoes were filled with his blood and got stuck to his feet. The Prophet ﷺ felt dizzy .</p><p><br/></p><p>Zaid (May Allah be pleased with him) said, “I helped the Prophet ﷺ to leave the village and we rested under a tree.” Both men then returned to Makkah. On the way, at Watane Nakhla, Prophet ﷺ woke up to offer Tahajjud and recited the Qur’an.</p><p><br/></p><p>The Jinns of that time had noticed that they could not cross over the heavens and hear the conversations of the angels anymore, rather they were chased by meteors and were driven away. Their leader instructed them to find out the reason so they wandered around. There was a valley called Nasibi which was inhibited by Jinns. These Jinns passed by the place at night when they heard the recitation. The group heard the melodious recitation of our Prophet ﷺ and were entranced. Without the knowledge of our Prophet ﷺ that group of Jinn accepted Islam. It was then the above verses of Surah Jinn were revealed. The point to be noted is that the humans of Taif rejected the Message of Allah but the Jinn accepted it. Allah truly does not let the efforts of the Believers go in vain.</p><p><br/></p><p>Once the Prophet ﷺ was sitting with his Companions. He had to go to attend the call of nature. He went a bit farther and did not return for a long time. The Companions were worried about his absence and feared that he had been abducted. They searched for him the whole night. In the morning, the Prophet ﷺ returned. When the Companions inquired, he replied, “I was called by a group of Jinns over that mountain, who had embraced Islam and wanted to learn the religion from me. It took me the whole night to teach them”. This night is called “Laylatul Jinn”. The Companions then went along him to the place and saw burnt sticks and ash which indicated that food was cooked that night. Therefore, it is essential to believe that the Prophet ﷺ was sent even to the Jinn.</p><p><br/></p><p>WRITE ACADEMIC RESEARCH AND SCHOLARLY ARTICLE QUESTIONING MUHAMMAD INTERACTED WITH JINNS WHICH IS AGAINST THE GOD OF THE BIBLE </p><p>ALL PROPHETS AND MESSENGERS WERE AGAINST JINNS AND CASTOUT JINNS BUT MUHAMMAD CONVERTED THEM TO ISLAM </p><p>THAT MEANS ALLAH IS NOT GOD OF THE BIBLE </p><p>QURAN DOES NOT AFFIRMS THE PREVIOUS BOOKS </p><p>MUHAMMAD WAS A PROPHET OF NOT THE GOD WHO IS AGAINST JINNS </p><p>ADD MORE QUESTION TO THE ARTICLE QUESTIONING MUHAMMAD PROPHETHOOD</p><p><br/></p><p>By Dr Maxwell Shimba from Shimba Theological Institute </p>

</div>
