# The Quran is a Book of Satan: 100% Proof Here in Quranic Verses and Muhammad's Hadith

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/05/the-quran-is-book-of-satan-100-proof.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-7411527662239500613" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p> <strong data-end="174" data-start="0">The Quran is a Book of Satan: 100% Proof Here in Quranic Verses and Muhammad's Hadith. If you Disagree, Tell Us Who Received These Verses and Who Commanded These Hadiths.</strong></p>
<hr class="" data-end="210" data-start="176"/>
<p class="" data-end="347" data-start="212"><strong data-end="347" data-start="212">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because the Enemy of Gabriel is Called Satan, and Muhammad Received the Book from the Enemy of Gabriel</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="590" data-start="349">✔ <em data-end="363" data-start="351">Quran 2:97</em>: Say, "Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, it is [none but] he who has brought it down upon your heart, [O Muhammad], by permission of Allah, confirming that which was before it and as guidance and good tidings for the believers."</p>
<hr class="" data-end="626" data-start="592"/>
<p class="" data-end="803" data-start="628"><strong data-end="803" data-start="628">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Assigns Devils to Humans, Which is Why We Say the Quran is a Book of Satan, Because Allah Himself Assigns Devils to God's People</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="946" data-start="805">✔ <em data-end="820" data-start="807">Quran 43:36</em>: And whoever is blinded from the remembrance of the Most Merciful - We appoint for him a devil, and he is to him a companion.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="982" data-start="948"/>
<p class="" data-end="1074" data-start="984"><strong data-end="1074" data-start="984">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Muhammad Admitted That He is the Prophet of Satan</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="1353" data-start="1076">Muhammad admits that he is the Prophet of Satan before his wife Aisha. Aisha said, "The Prophet said, 'Indeed, your Satan has come to you today!' Aisha asked, 'O Messenger of Allah, do you have a Satan?' He replied, 'Yes, but Allah helped me against him and he became Muslim.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="1662" data-start="1355">Narrated by Aisha: One night, the Prophet was missing and she thought he had gone to one of his wives. She went searching and found him praying in a tent, bowing or prostrating, and murmuring, "Subhaanaka wa behamdika, laa ilaha illa anta" (Glory be to You and praise be to You, there is no god except You).</p>
<hr class="" data-end="1698" data-start="1664"/>
<p class="" data-end="1828" data-start="1700"><strong data-end="1828" data-start="1700">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Muhammad Admitted That Allah is Satan in the Form of an Angel and His Book is the Quran</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="2071" data-start="1830">In Swahili: It is narrated by Anas Ibn Malik: "I heard the Prophet of Allah saying, 'Allah is Satan in the form of an angel who revealed to me His verses and His book, the Quran, and I am His prophet.' (Umdah Al - Ahkaam: Volume 3, Page 460)</p>
<p class="" data-end="2321" data-start="2073">In English: Narrated by Anas Ibn Malik: "I heard from the Apostle of Allah that he said: 'Allah was Satan in the form of an angel that revealed to me the verses and his book, the Quran, and I am his Prophet.' (Umdah Al - Ahkaam: Volume 3, Page 460)</p>
<p class="" data-end="2507" data-start="2323">In Arabic: رواه أنس ابن مالك: "سمعت من رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم أنه قال "كان الله هو شيطان في شكل ملاك كشف لي الآيات وكتابه القرآن وأنا نبي له." (عمدة الأحكام المجلد 3، الصفحة 460)</p>
<hr class="" data-end="2543" data-start="2509"/>
<p class="" data-end="2618" data-start="2545"><strong data-end="2618" data-start="2545">The Quran is a Book of Devils and the Devils Work Together with Allah</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="2805" data-start="2620">✔ <em data-end="2638" data-start="2622">Quran 38:36-37</em>: So We subjected the wind to him to blow by his command, gently wherever he directed, and the devils [also] We made subject to him - all kinds of builders and divers.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="2841" data-start="2807"/>
<p class="" data-end="3077" data-start="2843"><strong data-end="3077" data-start="2843">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Put Great Enmity Between People and Does Not Want Christians to Worship in Spirit and Truth. Look, Allah Even Knows the Sects of Christians Like Roman Catholics, Protestants, and Orthodox</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="3361" data-start="3079">✔ <em data-end="3093" data-start="3081">Quran 5:14</em>: And from those who say, "We are Christians," We took their covenant; but they forgot a portion of that of which they were reminded. So We caused among them enmity and hatred until the Day of Resurrection. And Allah is going to inform them about what they used to do.</p>
<p class="" data-end="3460" data-start="3363">Explanation of verse 14 to show the greatest conflict and apostasy among Christian sects such as:</p>
<p class="" data-end="3576" data-start="3462">✔ Roman Catholics<br/>
✔ Protestants (Seventh-day Adventists, Pentecostals, Anglicans, Lutherans)<br/>
✔ Orthodox and others</p>
<hr class="" data-end="3612" data-start="3578"/>
<p class="" data-end="3719" data-start="3614"><strong data-end="3719" data-start="3614">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah and Muhammad Have Great Hatred Towards Christians and Jews</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="3979" data-start="3721">✔ <em data-end="3735" data-start="3723">Quran 5:51</em>: O you who have believed, do not take the Jews and the Christians as allies. They are [in fact] allies of one another. And whoever is an ally to them among you - then indeed, he is [one] of them. Indeed, Allah guides not the wrongdoing people.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="4015" data-start="3981"/>
<p class="" data-end="4239" data-start="4017"><strong data-end="4239" data-start="4017">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah and Muhammad Have Great Hatred Towards Christians and Jews and Do Not Love Us, and They Forbid Muslims from Attending Christian or Non-Muslim Funerals or Visiting Their Graves</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="4468" data-start="4241">✔ <em data-end="4255" data-start="4243">Quran 9:84</em>: And do not pray [the funeral prayer, O Muhammad], over any of them who has died - ever - or stand at his grave. Indeed, they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and died while they were defiantly disobedient.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="4504" data-start="4470"/>
<p class="" data-end="4739" data-start="4506"><strong data-end="4739" data-start="4506">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Makes Devils Enemies to Prophets Who Are Not From Him. This is Proof Because He Himself is the Unknown God’s Messenger, and That's Why He Prays All the Time, Muhammad Says in Quran 33:56</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="4994" data-start="4741">✔ <em data-end="4756" data-start="4743">Quran 6:112</em>: And thus We have made for every prophet an enemy - devils from mankind and jinn, inspiring to one another decorative speech in delusion. But if your Lord had willed, they would not have done it, so leave them and that which they invent.</p>
<p class="" data-end="5231" data-start="4996">✔ Allah Prays Like Us to Another God, Muhammad Says, Therefore Allah is Not the Creator of the Heavens and Earth: Question - What is the Name of Allah's God Whom He Worships, and Muhammad's God Whom He Worships, and the God of Muslims?</p>
<p class="" data-end="5412" data-start="5233">✔ <em data-end="5248" data-start="5235">Quran 33:56</em>: Indeed, Allah and His angels send blessings upon the Prophet. O you who have believed, ask [Allah to confer] blessing upon him and ask [Allah to grant him] peace.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="5448" data-start="5414"/>
<p class="" data-end="5770" data-start="5450"><strong data-end="5770" data-start="5450">The Quran is a Book of Satan, We Get Proof from Your Book Called Minhajil Muslim, the Guide for Muslim Life, Written by Sheikh Abubakar Jabir Al-Jazair, Translated by Islamic Scholars, Page 589, Ibn Hazm Media Centre, and Also on Page 894, Topic 8 in Aqdu-Dhima (The Relationship Between Believers and Non-Believers)</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="5786" data-start="5772">It is written:</p>
<p class="" data-end="5874" data-start="5788">✔ "Separating People from the Responsibility of Islam"<br/>
✔ What is the Meaning of Dhima?</p>
<p class="" data-end="5999" data-start="5876">It is an Arabic word meaning the system of communication between human beings (some claim even between intelligent beings).</p>
<hr class="" data-end="6035" data-start="6001"/>
<p class="" data-end="6159" data-start="6037"><strong data-end="6159" data-start="6037">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Muhammad Commanded That Muslims Should Not Greet Christians and Non-Muslims First</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="6651" data-start="6161">✔ The stance on communication for Muslims is stated by Muhammad: "Do not initiate the greeting to Jews and Christians; if you meet any of them on the road, force them to the narrowest part of it." It is necessary to differentiate non-Muslims in appearance so they are recognized by this sign. It is also forbidden to bury non-Muslims in Muslim cemeteries or to stand in respect for them or to greet them, or to sit in the front row at gatherings, according to the words of Prophet Muhammad.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="6687" data-start="6653"/>
<p class="" data-end="6887" data-start="6689"><strong data-end="6887" data-start="6689">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Muhammad Commanded That It is Forbidden to Build Churches in All Islamic Countries and It is Forbidden to Build Buildings Higher Than the Mosques of Muhammad</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="6958" data-start="6889">Prohibited Acts in Ahl al-Dhimma (Non-Muslim Rights in Islamic Faith)</p>
<p class="" data-end="7031" data-start="6960">Ahl al-Dhimma are not allowed to do the following in Islamic countries:</p>
<p class="" data-end="7116" data-start="7033">It is forbidden to build churches in Islamic countries; this is Muhammad's command.</p>
<p class="" data-end="7295" data-start="7118">Muhammad said, "No church shall be built in the Islamic country, nor shall any church be rebuilt that has been destroyed." (Al-Mughni by Ibn Qudamah. Nayl al-Awtaar by Shawkani)</p>
<p class="" data-end="7395" data-start="7297">"Christians are not allowed to raise their houses higher than Islamic houses (mosques)." (Baihaqi)</p>
<hr class="" data-end="7431" data-start="7397"/>
<p class="" data-end="7650" data-start="7433"><strong data-end="7650" data-start="7433">This is Why Allah of the Arabs Does Not Want to Be Worshipped or Prostrated to by Any Human Being on Earth, and If You Worship and Prostrate to Allah, Prepare to Go to Hell Where He Will Also Go as per Quran 50:30</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="7805" data-start="7652">✔ <em data-end="7667" data-start="7654">Quran 40:60</em>: And your Lord says, "Call upon Me; I will respond to you." Indeed, those who disdain My worship will enter Hell [rendered] contemptible.</p>
<hr class="" data-end="7841" data-start="7807"/>
<p class="" data-end="8124" data-start="7843"><strong data-end="8124" data-start="7843">The Quran is a Book of Jinn Devils; Here is the Proof. Muhammad is the Prophet of Jinn and Muslim Humans; Therefore, Jinn Devils and Muslim Humans Have Muhammad as Their Prophet and Their Book is the Quran and Their Place of Worship is the Mosque, Quran 72:1-14 and Quran 46:29</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="8786" data-start="8126">✔ <em data-end="8143" data-start="8128">Quran 72:1-14</em>: Say, "It has been revealed to me that a group of the jinn listened and said, 'Indeed, we have heard an amazing Quran.<br/>
2. It guides to the right course, and we have believed in it. And we will never associate with our Lord anyone.<br/>
3. And it teaches that exalted is the nobleness of our Lord; He has not taken a wife or a son.<br/>
4. And that our foolish one has been saying about Allah an excessive transgression.<br/>
5. And we had thought that mankind and the jinn would never speak about Allah a lie.<br/>
6. And there were men from mankind who sought refuge in men from the jinn, so they [only] increased them in burden.<br/>
7. And they had thought, as you desired, that Allah would never send anyone [as a messenger].</p><p class="" data-end="927" data-start="0">
8. And we have sought [to reach] the heaven but found it filled with powerful guards and burning flames.<br/>
9. And we used to sit therein in positions for hearing, but whoever listens now will find a burning flame lying in wait for him.<br/>
10. And we do not know [therefore] whether evil is intended for those on earth or whether their Lord intends for them a right course.<br/>
11. And among us are the righteous, and among us are [others] not so; we were [of] divided ways.<br/>
12. And we have become certain that we will never cause failure to Allah upon earth, nor can we escape Him by flight.<br/>
13. And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. And whoever believes in his Lord will not fear deprivation or burden.<br/>
14. And among us are Muslims [in submission to Allah], and among us are the unjust. And whoever has become Muslim - those have sought out the right course.'"</p><p class="" data-end="1165" data-start="929">✔ <em data-end="944" data-start="931">Quran 46:29</em>: And [mention, O Muhammad], when We directed to you a few of the jinn, listening to the Quran. And when they attended it, they said, "Listen quietly." And when it was concluded, they went back to their people as warners.</p><hr class="" data-end="1201" data-start="1167"/><p class="" data-end="1471" data-start="1203"><strong data-end="1471" data-start="1203">The Quran is a Book of Jinn Devils; Here is the Proof. Muhammad is the Prophet of Jinn and Muslim Humans; Therefore, Jinn Devils and Muslim Humans Have Muhammad as Their Prophet, and Their Book is the Quran, and Their Place of Worship is the Mosque, Quran 46:30-32</strong></p><p class="" data-end="1985" data-start="1473">✔ <em data-end="1491" data-start="1475">Quran 46:30-32</em>: They said, "O our people, indeed we have heard a [recited] Book revealed after Moses confirming what was before it which guides to the truth and to a straight path.<br/>
31. O our people, respond to the Messenger of Allah and believe in him; Allah will forgive for you your sins and protect you from a painful punishment.<br/>
32. But he who does not respond to the caller of Allah will not cause failure to Him upon earth, and he will not have besides Him any protectors. Those are in manifest error."</p><hr class="" data-end="2021" data-start="1987"/><p class="" data-end="2196" data-start="2023"><strong data-end="2196" data-start="2023">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Himself Said that He is the Deceiver and He Deceived the Arabs to Believe that Jesus Christ was not Crucified but was Taken Up</strong></p><p class="" data-end="2590" data-start="2198">✔ <em data-end="2213" data-start="2200">Quran 4:157</em>: And [for] their saying, "Indeed, we have killed the Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of Allah." And they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him; but [another] was made to resemble him to them. And indeed, those who differ over it are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it except the following of assumption. And they did not kill him, for certain.</p><hr class="" data-end="2626" data-start="2592"/><p class="" data-end="2728" data-start="2628"><strong data-end="2728" data-start="2628">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Made Jesus Speak Blasphemy About Himself in the Quran</strong></p><p class="" data-end="3096" data-start="2730">✔ <em data-end="2744" data-start="2732">Quran 3:55</em>: [Mention] when Allah said, "O Jesus, indeed I will take you and raise you to Myself and purify you from those who disbelieve and make those who follow you [in submission to Allah alone] superior to those who disbelieve until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me is your return, and I will judge between you concerning that in which you used to differ.</p><hr class="" data-end="3132" data-start="3098"/><p class="" data-end="3265" data-start="3134"><strong data-end="3265" data-start="3134">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because Allah Made Muhammad Receive Revelations that Led Him to Commit Acts Contrary to God's Laws</strong></p><p class="" data-end="3628" data-start="3267">✔ Muhammad’s marriages and relationships with women are considered by many to be morally questionable. Examples include his marriage to Aisha, a young girl, and his marriage to Zaynab bint Jahsh, the wife of his adopted son Zayd. These actions, justified by revelations in the Quran, raise questions about the nature of the divine inspiration Muhammad received.</p><hr class="" data-end="3664" data-start="3630"/><p class="" data-end="3787" data-start="3666"><strong data-end="3787" data-start="3666">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because it Contradicts the Bible and Calls for Acts That Are Against Christian Teachings</strong></p><p class="" data-end="3929" data-start="3789">✔ The Quran allows for violence and war against non-believers (Quran 9:5), whereas Jesus taught love, peace, and forgiveness (Matthew 5:39).</p><p class="" data-end="4048" data-start="3931">✔ The Quran permits polygamy (Quran 4:3), while the Bible upholds monogamy as the ideal (Genesis 2:24, Matthew 19:5).</p><hr class="" data-end="4084" data-start="4050"/><p class="" data-end="4202" data-start="4086"><strong data-end="4202" data-start="4086">The Quran is a Book of Satan Because it Denies the Divinity of Jesus Christ, Which is Central to Christian Faith</strong></p><p class="" data-end="4548" data-start="4204">✔ <em data-end="4218" data-start="4206">Quran 5:72</em>: They have certainly disbelieved who say, "Allah is the Messiah, the son of Mary" while the Messiah has said, "O Children of Israel, worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord." Indeed, he who associates others with Allah - Allah has forbidden him Paradise, and his refuge is the Fire. And there are not for the wrongdoers any helpers.</p><hr class="" data-end="4584" data-start="4550"/><p class="" data-end="4600" data-start="4586"><strong data-end="4600" data-start="4586">Conclusion</strong></p><p class="" data-end="4988" data-start="4602">The evidence presented above clearly shows that the Quran contains verses and teachings that align with the characteristics of deception, enmity, and opposition to the core beliefs of Christianity. These points illustrate why the Quran is considered by many Christians to be a book of Satan, filled with contradictions and teachings that lead people away from the true God of the Bible.</p><p>
</p><p class="" data-end="5189" data-start="4990">We urge you to carefully consider this evidence and seek the truth. Compare these teachings with the Bible, which consistently promotes love, truth, and the worship of the one true God, Jesus Christ.</p>

</div>
