# Muhammad was a False Prophet and Not from Allah

**Source:** [Max Shimba Ministries](https://www.maxshimbaministries.org/2025/05/muhammad-was-false-prophet-and-not-from.html)

**Category:** 21 Max Shimba Ministries

---

<div class="post-body entry-content" id="post-body-6795930139936643895" itemprop="description articleBody">
<p><strong data-end="174" data-start="53">Muhammad S.A.W, the Prophet of Islam, has never been, is not, and will never be a True Prophet and Messenger of Allah</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="367" data-start="176">I have read on the community forums blog and seen Muslims persuading others to believe that Muhammad is among the prophets and messengers of the living God, which is not true. Follow along...</p>
<p class="" data-end="424" data-start="369"><strong data-end="396" data-start="369">KNOW THE FALSE PROPHETS</strong><br/>
By Teacher Daniel Mwankemwa</p>
<p class="" data-end="874" data-start="426"><strong data-end="443" data-start="426">INTRODUCTION:</strong><br/>
The issue of identifying false prophets has been a significant challenge for many people because these false prophets come claiming, "We have been sent by Allah to deliver His message, and thus people must accept, believe, and follow it." When a prophet comes in this manner and meets people who cannot discern prophets and messengers based on God's Word, that is when deception occurs, and various groups of false beliefs emerge.</p>
<p class="" data-end="1360" data-start="876">Here in Tanzania, when you read the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania, Article 19 (i-iii), you will find explanations that a follower of any religion has the freedom to change their initial religion and join another religion they deem suitable for them. However, despite that freedom, not every religion (path) is suitable; some lead to eternal death.<br/>
Proverbs 14:12 "There is a way that appears to be right, but in the end it leads to death." (See also Proverbs 16:25).</p>
<p class="" data-end="1533" data-start="1362">Among the individuals called prophets and messengers is a man named Muhammad s.a.w ibn Abdullah, ibn Abdu Muttalib, who is a prophet and messenger in the Islamic religion.</p>
<p class="" data-end="1936" data-start="1535">You, the reader of this lesson, might wonder how we, who are not Muslims but Christians, begin to question the matters of Muhammad s.a.w, the prophet of Muslims. The answer is that the Quran, used by Muslims, mentions us Christians 62 times, urging us to accept, believe, and eventually follow Muhammad's message, claiming that he is the final prophet and messenger even to us Christians, sent by God.</p>
<p class="" data-end="2290" data-start="1938">We read this in the Quran in Surah Al-Baqarah (The Cow), 2:62:<br/>
"Indeed, those who believed and those who were Jews or Christians or Sabeans - those [among them] who believed in Allah (as Muhammad says now) and the Last Day and did righteousness - will have their reward with their Lord, and no fear will there be concerning them, nor will they grieve."</p>
<p class="" data-end="2532" data-start="2292">For us as Christians, although we are mentioned in this verse, a question arises about Muhammad's prophethood and messengership: "WHAT DID ALLAH FORGET IN HIS COMPLETE WORK OF REDEEMING HUMANITY FROM SIN THAT HE HAD TO SEND MUHAMMAD S.A.W?"</p>
<p class="" data-end="3603" data-start="2534"><strong data-end="2556" data-start="2534">What is a prophet?</strong><br/>
A prophet is a person officially chosen by divine criteria to deliver God's message to people. In other words, a prophet is a spokesperson for God's mysteries.<br/>
A prophet is a person who is a mouthpiece of God. He stands between God and humans, with the duty of delivering God's message to people. When a prophet is a spokesperson for God, he is inspired by the Holy Spirit, and his message is without error. The prophet restrains his own will, self, and thoughts when delivering God's prophetic message. Sometimes God Himself puts His words in their mouths (Deut 18:18, Jer 1:9). A prophet is a servant of God (Zech 1:6) and a messenger of God (2 Chron 36:15). Their prophecies are divided into three categories: prophecies concerning the fate of Israel, prophecies related to the coming of the Messiah, and eschatological prophecies (prophecies about future events). Therefore, the Law and the Prophets relate to the Pentateuch, i.e., Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. The prophets are all other books besides the Pentateuch.</p>
<p class="" data-end="4230" data-start="3605">The book of the prophet Amos 3:7 "Surely the Sovereign LORD does nothing without revealing his plan to his servants the prophets." The word prophet originates from the Hebrew language and means seer. 1 Sam 9:9 "Formerly in Israel, if someone went to inquire of God, they would say, 'Come, let us go to the seer,' because the prophet of today used to be called a seer."<br/>
This verse shows that true prophets of God must have their revelation or message originating from Allah Himself (the Holy Spirit), or dreams from Him, or visions from Him (Num 12:6), or through holy angels (Dan 8:15-21). Otherwise, they are false prophets.</p>
<p class="" data-end="4554" data-start="4232"><strong data-end="4260" data-start="4232">Warning from Lord Jesus:</strong><br/>
When Lord Jesus was here on earth, He warned us about recognizing false prophets and messengers before Muhammad was born (he was born in 570 AD), before Islam was established by Muhammad in 610 AD, and before the existence of a book called the Quran. We read these warnings from Lord Jesus in:</p>
<p class="" data-end="4722" data-start="4556">Matthew 7:15-16 "Watch out for false prophets. They come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ferocious wolves. By their fruit, you will recognize them."</p>
<p class="" data-end="4929" data-start="4724">Matthew 24:11-13 "And many false prophets will appear and deceive many people. Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved."</p>
<p class="" data-end="5616" data-start="4931">The apostles of Lord Jesus emphasized and reinforced Jesus' warning about recognizing false prophets and apostles.<br/>
1 John 4:1-3, 15 "Dear friends, do not believe every spirit but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world. This is how you can recognize the Spirit of God: Every spirit that acknowledges that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, but every spirit that does not acknowledge Jesus is not from God. This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming and even now is already in the world. 15 If anyone acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God lives in them and they in God."</p>
<p class="" data-end="5801" data-start="5618">These criteria given by the Holy Bible to identify false prophets and messengers are very important for us to examine in the lives of those who call themselves prophets or messengers.</p>
<p class="" data-end="6146" data-start="5803"><strong data-end="5866" data-start="5803">A true prophet receives revelation through the Holy Spirit:</strong><br/>
2 Peter 1:20-21 "Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet’s own interpretation of things. For prophecy never had its origin in the human will, but prophets, though human, spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit."</p>
<p class="" data-end="6480" data-start="6148">1 Peter 1:10-11 "Concerning this salvation, the prophets, who spoke of the grace that was to come to you, searched intently and with the greatest care, trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of the Messiah and the glories that would follow."</p>
<p class="" data-end="6758" data-start="6482">Revelation 19:10 "At this, I fell at his feet to worship him. But he said to me, 'Don’t do that! I am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers and sisters who hold to the testimony of Jesus. Worship God! For it is the Spirit of prophecy who bears testimony to Jesus.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="6946" data-start="6760">Thus, the prophets spoke within them being led by the Spirit of Christ Himself, even before He came to the world in the flesh. Is Muhammad s.a.w among them for us to believe his message?</p>
<p class="" data-end="7168" data-start="6948"><strong data-end="6994" data-start="6948">Muhammad did not know how to read or write</strong><br/>
Quran 7:157<br/>
"Those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered prophet (who can neither read nor write) whom they find written in what they have of the Torah and the Gospel..."</p>
<p class="" data-end="7332" data-start="7170">Another evidence can be found in the book "Life of Prophet Muhammad" page 8 written by Sheikh Abdallah Saleh Al-Farsy. We read as follows in the learning segment:</p>
<p class="" data-end="7660" data-start="7334">“There was no reading or writing in the Hijaz region, so the Prophet grew up like other Quraysh without knowing how to read or write. Their education was to learn matters concerning their Bedouin life, such as wars, composing poems to boast their bravery, and giving speeches that could stir people to fight without thinking.”</p>
<p class="" data-end="7765" data-start="7662">Thus, Muhammad in his life did not know how to read or write, and that is how he lived his entire life.</p>
<p class="" data-end="8136" data-start="7767"><strong data-end="7808" data-start="7767">Did Jesus know how to read and write?</strong> Luke 4:16-17. Muslims claim in John 7:14 that people in Jerusalem were surprised by Jesus's knowledge, wondering how He learned without studying. The truth is that Jerusalem was not where Jesus grew up. He grew up in Nazareth, where people knew He could read, which is why He was given the scroll of the prophet Isaiah to read.</p>
<p class="" data-end="8202" data-start="8138"><strong data-end="8202" data-start="8138">How Muhammad (S.A.W) Received His Prophethood and Revelation</strong></p>
<p class="" data-end="8698" data-start="8204">The revelation Muhammad received as the prophet of Muslims is very different from all the prophets before him mentioned in the Holy Bible. The difference is that all the prophets and apostles mentioned in the Holy Bible, written by various authors numbering about 40 over a long period, nearly 1500 years, have a unified revelation (it has conformity). The prophecies of the Old Testament are fulfilled in the New Testament. This is because the source of the revelation is one, the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="" data-end="8871" data-start="8700">But for Muhammad s.a.w, the source of his revelation and eventually his prophethood is very controversial, and even followers of that religion do not know the exact truth.</p>
<p class="" data-end="8912" data-start="8873">Let's briefly examine this controversy.</p>
<p class="" data-end="9106" data-start="8914">When Muhammad s.a.w reached the age of 38, he moved from his home to caves near the city of Mecca. When he reached 40, one day, he encountered a being that Muslims today call the Angel Jibril.</p>
<p class="" data-end="9843" data-start="9108">The revelation Muhammad received came with the sound of bells, a red face, and sweating. In Bukhari, Hadith 2, Volume 1, Al-Lu’lu Book 3, Page 874 Hadith 1505:<br/>
“Hadith of Aisha r.a mother of the believers, said that Al Harith ibn Hisham r.a asked the Prophet of Allah s.a.w, 'O Messenger of Allah, how does the revelation come to you?' The Prophet of Allah s.a.w replied, 'Sometimes it comes like the ringing of a bell, and this is the hardest on me. When it leaves, I have understood what it said. Other times, the angel comes to me in the form of a man, and he speaks to me, and I grasp what he says.' Aisha r.a said, 'And indeed, I saw it coming upon him on a very cold day, and when it left, his forehead was dripping with sweat.'”</p>
<p class="" data-end="10088" data-start="9845">Quran 53:2-6 Suratul Najm (The Star) "Your companion [Muhammad] has not strayed, nor has he erred, nor does he speak from [his own] inclination. It is not but a revelation revealed, taught to him by one intense in strength - one of soundness."</p>
<p class="" data-end="10360" data-start="10090">Muslims claim that this Angel Jibril is the same as the Holy Spirit who revealed the Quran to Muhammad. When we read the explanation of Surah 2:87 in the Quran, it says:<br/>
"For Muslims, the Holy Spirit is Angel Jibril, not the one Christians claim as part of the Trinity."</p>
<p class="" data-end="11010" data-start="10362">One thing I want you to know is that all Muslims were not given knowledge about the Spirit. This includes their prophet Muhammad. We read this in Quran 3:7:<br/>
"He is the one who sent down to you the Book; in it, there are definite verses (clear in meaning) that are the essence of the Book, and others are allegorical. As for those in whose hearts is deviation, they follow the part of it which is allegorical, seeking discord and seeking an interpretation. And no one knows its interpretation except Allah. But those firm in knowledge say, 'We believe in it. All [of it] is from our Lord.' And no one will be reminded except those of understanding."</p>
<p class="" data-end="11206" data-start="11012">Quran 17:85 Suratul Ban Israil (The Children of Israel):<br/>
"And they ask you about the soul. Say, 'The soul is of the affair of my Lord. And you have not been given of knowledge except a little.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="11809" data-start="11208">Thus, in Islam, they lack the knowledge of the Spirit according to the Quran. This is why they often focus more on external matters than spiritual ones, such as washing and rinsing the nose with water, believing they have expelled Satan who was in the nose. In the book "Al-Lu'lu' wal-Marjan," Volume 1, Hadith 183, Page 96, it reads:<br/>
"Narrated by Abu Huraira (r.a), the Prophet (s.a.w) said, 'When one of you wakes up from sleep, let him wash his nose by sniffing water and blowing it out three times because Satan spends the night in the upper part of his nose.' (Bukhari, Hadith No. 516, Volume 4)"</p>
<p class="" data-end="11962" data-start="11811">Having understood how Muslims lack the knowledge of the Spirit, we now question who this angel called Jibril is. Is he an angel of the true God YEHOVA?</p>
<p class="" data-end="12190" data-start="11964">The Holy Bible explains about angels who rebelled in heaven and were cast down. 1 Peter 2:4 "For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but sent them to hell, putting them in chains of darkness to be held for judgment;"</p>
<p class="" data-end="12380" data-start="12192">These teachings of the Bible show that there is a group of angels that rebelled and were cast out and are now awaiting judgment. This group today is called Satan, Jinn, or unclean spirits.</p>
<p class="" data-end="12526" data-start="12382">But when we read the Quran, a book that came much later in the 7th century (610 AD), after the Bible, we get different information about angels.</p>
<p class="" data-end="12745" data-start="12528">Quran 32:13 Suratul As-Sajdah (Prostration):<br/>
"If We had willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but the word from Me will come into effect [that] 'I will surely fill Hell with jinn and men all together.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="13087" data-start="12747">The explanation of this verse in the Quran reads:<br/>
"If Allah had willed, He would have created humans like angels who cannot do evil, their nature being to do only good; therefore, they would not be rewarded for their good deeds because they do them effortlessly. But humans are created capable of both, and their joy is more in doing evil."</p>
<p class="" data-end="13421" data-start="13089">This verse and its explanation state that all angels of Muhammad's Allah are good; none has sinned, and among those angels, one appeared to Muhammad and gave him prophethood and the revelation of the Quran. Now let’s examine the cave where Muhammad was when he received his prophethood. We will be guided by Islamic religious books.</p>
<p class="" data-end="14183" data-start="13423">In the book "Life of Prophet Muhammad" page 16-17 written by Sheikh Abdullah Saleh Al-Farsy, we read as follows:<br/>
"Then one day - in the month of Ramadan on the 17th, Monday in the year of his 40th ½ age - the Prophet saw a person standing before him without seeing where he came from. The person said to him, 'Read.' The Prophet replied, 'I do not know how to read for I have not learned to read.' The person came and held him, squeezed him, and said again, 'Read,' and the Prophet gave the same answer. For the third time, the person said, 'Read - Iqraa Bismi Rabbik.' He recited that part of Surah 96 to him. Then the Prophet read it as it was recited to him. This was the first Surah to be revealed in the Quran, although it was not placed at the beginning.</p>
<p class="" data-end="15097" data-start="14185">Suddenly, that person (the Angel) disappeared from his sight - he could not see where he went. And the Prophet returned home, fear had gripped him. When he reached home, Lady Khadija thought he had a fever, covered him with clothes, and sat in front of him listening to him groan. When the fever subsided, he explained everything that had happened to Lady Khadija, and she comforted him, assuring him that nothing bad would happen to him. Immediately, she went to her relative - Mr. Waraqa bin Naufal - and gave him the full story. He instructed her to bring Muhammad to him. And the Prophet went and told him the whole story. Mr. Waraqa told him, 'That is Jibril who came to Prophet Musa and Prophet Isa. So be glad that you are the Prophet of this nation, and I wish I were alive to see you standing to reform your people; InshaAllah, I will be your right hand.' They returned home, and all the fear left him."</p>
<p class="" data-end="15936" data-start="15099"><strong data-end="15143" data-start="15099">He was played with by Satan in the cave:</strong><br/>
In the book titled "Great Prophets and Their Wives" written by Sheikh Abdullah Saleh Al-Farsy, page 12, we read:<br/>
"Then the Prophet was frightened and returned to his wife, told her the story, and immediately got a high fever, asking to be covered with clothes. Suddenly he began shaking and groaning, saying, 'I fear that Satan has played with me and driven me mad and deceived me.' Lady Khadija immediately replied, 'Stop that; it will not happen. You cannot be played with by demons. Satan cannot play with a person of your character. You take good care of your relatives, carry the burdens of even those who are not yours, and show people your good qualities that no one else has. You do this and that. Be glad, my brother. Calm your heart, by Allah! I see that you have become a prophet."</p>
<p class="" data-end="16599" data-start="15938">In this incident that happened to Muhammad while in the cave, Muslims worldwide say that this is where Muhammad s.a.w received revelation and was given prophethood. But when you reflect on that message, you see that even he did not know what had happened to him in the cave. That is why we read that when he reached home, his wife, Lady Khadija, covered him with clothes thinking he had a fever. Muhammad told his wife what had happened, saying it was "Satan," not mentioning any angel as Muslims want us to believe today. Because if it were an angel as we read in the Bible, he would not have hesitated to identify himself to Muhammad. This is the first point.</p>
<p class="" data-end="16926" data-start="16601"><strong data-end="16621" data-start="16601">The second point</strong> is that we see a man named Waraqah ibn Naufal, the cousin of Muhammad's wife Lady Khadija. He tells Muhammad that the being that appeared to him was Angel Jibril. He then says, "Be glad that you are the Prophet of this nation!" Was he present in the cave when Muhammad was approached by an unknown being?</p>
<p class="" data-end="17200" data-start="16928"><strong data-end="16947" data-start="16928">The third point</strong> is that even his wife, Lady Khadija, tells her husband about this prophethood. Was she in the cave? If not, who told her that it was Angel Jibril, given that Muhammad himself, who encountered the being, said he was approached by Satan? Reflect on this.</p>
<p class="" data-end="17391" data-start="17202">In the book titled "Tafsir Al-Kashif," by Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah, page 74, paragraph 7, it reads:<br/>
"There is no way to know Iblis, Satan, and Jinn except through revelation (revelation)."</p>
<p class="" data-end="17501" data-start="17393">Quran Suratul Sad 38:69 Muhammad is quoted saying:<br/>
"I had no knowledge of the exalted assembly of angels..."</p>
<p class="" data-end="17742" data-start="17503">Because Muhammad s.a.w did not know angels, he says when you see a donkey bray, it has seen Satan. In the book "The Truthful Trustworthy," Volume 3-4, Hadith 789, page 38, "The Prophet (s.a.w) said, 'If a donkey brays, it has seen Satan.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="18470" data-start="17744">This matter is different from how the Holy Bible explains about donkeys. God can even use a donkey to speak to humans to inform them of His message. In the book of Numbers 22:22-31, we read about Balaam and how God used a donkey to tell Balaam not to continue his journey after the donkey saw the angel of the Lord standing before them with a drawn sword blocking their way. The donkey spoke to Balaam in verse 30-31:<br/>
"The donkey said to Balaam, 'Am I not your own donkey, which you have always ridden, to this day? Have I been in the habit of doing this to you?' 'No,' he said. Then the LORD opened Balaam's eyes, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the road with his sword drawn. So he bowed low and fell facedown."</p>
<p class="" data-end="18656" data-start="18472">It appears that in this incident with Balaam, God opened his eyes to see the angel. But for Muhammad, what he sees is Satan. That is why he says when a donkey brays, it has seen Satan.</p>
<p class="" data-end="18994" data-start="18658">Therefore, if Muhammad's revelation begins with Satan as explained in the authentic Islamic books, according to the explanation in the book "Tafsir Al-Kashif," it shows that Muhammad's revelation, prophethood, and even apostleship have a significant flaw compared to the message of the prophets and apostles mentioned in the Holy Bible.</p>
<p class="" data-end="19403" data-start="18996">In the Bible, Satan is mentioned as being able to disguise himself as an angel of light.<br/>
2 Corinthians 11:13-15 "For such people are false apostles, deceitful workers, masquerading as apostles of Christ. And no wonder, for Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light. It is not surprising, then, if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness. Their end will be what their actions deserve."</p>
<p class="" data-end="19793" data-start="19405">When Muhammad was in Medina, he was asked by the Jews if his revelation came from the true God, by being asked to provide the characteristics of prophets. In response, Muhammad said:<br/>
"The Truthful Trustworthy," Volume 3-4, Page 63, Hadith No. 880:<br/>
"The Prophet (s.a.w) said, 'There are four qualities of the prophets: modesty, using perfume, marrying (wives), and using the tooth-stick.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="19880" data-start="19795">These are not divine characteristics for a prophet and apostle but merely human ones.</p>
<p class="" data-end="20566" data-start="19882"><strong data-end="19946" data-start="19882">Prophets and various people in the Bible did not feel shame.</strong><br/>
Read Isaiah 50:7 "Because the Sovereign LORD helps me, I will not be disgraced. Therefore, I have set my face like flint, and I know I will not be put to shame."<br/>
Psalm 34:5 "Those who look to him are radiant; their faces are never covered with shame."<br/>
Psalm 119:46 "I will speak of your statutes before kings and will not be put to shame."<br/>
Romans 1:16 "For I am not ashamed of the gospel because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes: first to the Jew, then to the Gentile."<br/>
1 Peter 4:16 "However, if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but praise God that you bear that name."</p>
<p class="" data-end="20751" data-start="20568">Moreover, we see that Muhammad was bewitched. Being bewitched is the state of being affected by dark powers, i.e., witchcraft. Can a prophet or messenger of the true God be bewitched?</p>
<p class="" data-end="21236" data-start="20753">In Quran Suratul Ban-Israel, 17:47 "We know very well why they listen when they listen to you, and when they conspire in secret, when the wrongdoers say, 'You follow none but a bewitched man.'"<br/>
Also, in Suratul Falaq, 113:1-5 "Say, 'I seek refuge in the Lord of the dawn, from the evil of what He has created, and from the evil of darkness when it settles, and from the evil of those who blow on knots (those who practice witchcraft), and from the evil of an envier when he envies.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="23013" data-start="21238">We read this incident in its explanation in the Quran, 8th edition, page 977, explaining Surahs 113-114:<br/>
"The impact of witchcraft on the Prophet (s.a.w). The second question that arises regarding these two surahs is that according to the hadith, witchcraft was performed against the Prophet (s.a.w) and he became ill, and to remove the impact of witchcraft, Jibril (a.s) came and gave him instructions to recite these two surahs. Many researchers, past and present, have opposed this matter, saying that if these hadith are accepted, then the entire system of sharia will be questionable because if the Prophet (s.a.w) could be affected by witchcraft and indeed showed its effects according to these hadith, then we cannot deny or dispute to what extent the enemies were able to make the Prophet (s.a.w) say and do things under the influence of witchcraft, and in his teachings, how much came from Allah and how much resulted from the impact of witchcraft on him. Not only that, but they also say these hadith contradict the Quran, as stated in the Quran, that the false claim of the disbelievers was that the Prophet (s.a.w) was bewitched, and he was affected by witchcraft: 'When the wrongdoers say, 'You follow none but a bewitched man.'' (17:47), but these hadith affirm the claims of the disbelievers that he was indeed affected and guided by witchcraft...According to the hadith narrated by Bukhari, Muslim, Nasai, Ibn Majah, Ahmad, 'Abdur Razzaq, Humaid, Baihaqi, Tabarani, Ibn Sa'd, Ibn Marduyah, Ibn Abi Shaibah, Hakim, Abd bin Humaid, and other Muhaddithin from Aisha (r.a), Zaid bin Arqam, Ibn 'Abbas through numerous chains of narration, it shows that the matter itself has reached the state of complete continuity, except that each hadith is a complete report."</p>
<p class="" data-end="23328" data-start="23015">This is another substantial evidence showing that Muhammad's prophethood has issues. If Muslims themselves, according to these hadith, do not know how many of Muhammad's statements came from Allah and how many were influenced by sorcerers, can his revelation and prophethood be from the true God? Reflect on this!</p>
<p class="" data-end="23546" data-start="23330"><strong data-end="23393" data-start="23330">In the Holy Bible, there is no bewitchment of God's people.</strong><br/>
Numbers 23:23 "There is no divination against Jacob, no evil omens against Israel. It will now be said of Jacob and of Israel, 'See what God has done!'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="23936" data-start="23548">According to the Holy Bible, true prophets and messengers of God come from the nation of Israel.<br/>
The book of Ezekiel 13:9 "My hand will be against the prophets who see false visions and utter lying divinations. They will not belong to the council of my people or be listed in the records of Israel, nor will they enter the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the Sovereign LORD."</p>
<p class="" data-end="24323" data-start="23938">Also, according to the Quran, prophets and messengers must come from Jacob, who is the son of Isaac, who is the son of Abraham.<br/>
Quran Suratul Al-Ankabut (The Spider), 29:27 "And We gave [to him] Isaac and Jacob, and We placed in his descendants prophethood and [revelation of] the Book, and We gave him his reward in this world, and indeed, he is in the Hereafter among the righteous."</p>
<p class="" data-end="24753" data-start="24325">This verse continues to emphasize that prophethood and the Book come through the descendants of Jacob. Unfortunately, Muhammad ibn Abdullah does not come from that lineage or even from Ishmael as Muslims claim. Because Ishmael is a Hebrew like his father, Abraham, who is also a Hebrew (Genesis 14:13), and Muhammad is an Arab from the Quraysh tribe. Recognizing this, we see Muhammad warning others to stay away from his tribe.</p>
<p class="" data-end="25055" data-start="24755"><strong data-end="24850" data-start="24755">Sahih Al-Bukhari Volume 1, Hadith No. 801, and Al-Lu'lu Book 3, Page 1089, Hadith No. 1846:</strong><br/>
"The hadith of Abu Huraira (r.a) states, 'The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) said, 'This Quraysh tribe will destroy people.' They asked, 'What do you advise us?' He said, 'I advise people to separate from it.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="25327" data-start="25057"><strong data-end="25085" data-start="25057">Dipping a fly in a drink</strong><br/>
Bukhari Volume 4 Hadith 537: "Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said: If a house fly falls into the drink of any one of you, he should dip it (in the drink) because one of its wings has a disease, and the other has the cure for the disease."</p>
<p class="" data-end="25596" data-start="25329">The Apostles of Jesus in the Holy Bible warned us about such filth. In 2 Corinthians 7:1:<br/>
"Therefore, since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence for God."</p>
<p class="" data-end="26263" data-start="25598">Among the teachings of Muhammad is that there are ten things that complete Islam, and we read about them in the book "The Truthful Trustworthy," written by Sheikh Said Moosa Al-Kindy of Muscat, Volume 3-4, Page 63, Hadith No. 880:<br/>
"The Prophet (s.a.w) said, 'There are ten things that complete Islam: trimming the mustache, letting the beard grow (not shaving it), using the tooth-stick, cleaning inside the nose with water, cutting the nails, washing the hands between the fingers, plucking (or shaving) the armpit hair, shaving the pubic hair, and conserving water. The tenth one, the narrator of the hadith said, I forgot, but he said it must be 'circumcision.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="26511" data-start="26265"><strong data-end="26348" data-start="26265">According to the Bible, prophets and messengers are confirmed through miracles.</strong><br/>
Exodus 14:21 "Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and all that night the LORD drove the sea back with a strong east wind and turned it into dry land."</p>
<p class="" data-end="26770" data-start="26513">Acts 19:11-12 "God did extraordinary miracles through Paul so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured, and the evil spirits left them." See also Acts 16:16-18, 20:7-12, and Acts 13:6-12.</p>
<p class="" data-end="27149" data-start="26772">The Quran also confirms that prophets and messengers must perform miracles.<br/>
Quran 40:78 Suratul Al-Mumin (The Believer):<br/>
"And We certainly sent messengers before you. Among them are those [whose stories] We have related to you, and among them are those [whose stories] We have not related to you. And it was not for any messenger to bring a sign except by permission of Allah."</p>
<p class="" data-end="27426" data-start="27151"><strong data-end="27245" data-start="27151">Muhammad was not given any miracle to confirm his claims of prophethood and messengership.</strong><br/>
Quran 29:50 Suratul Al-Ankabut (The Spider):<br/>
"And they say, 'Why are not signs sent down to him from his Lord?' Say, 'The signs are only with Allah, and I am only a clear warner.'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="27719" data-start="27428">In the Quran, there is a verse that we should all reflect on together. In Suratul An-Nisaa (Women), 4:79, "Whatever of good reaches you is from Allah, but whatever of evil befalls you is from yourself. And We have sent you to the people as a messenger, and sufficient is Allah as a witness."</p>
<p class="" data-end="28310" data-start="27721">This verse shows that Muhammad, the prophet of Muslims, was sent to people as a messenger, with Allah being just a witness. A witness is never the doer but merely the observer of the deed. Our question is, who are the people who sent Muhammad to the people? Because we saw earlier that after Muhammad left the cave, his wife Lady Khadija told him about the prophethood, and Mr. Waraqah ibn Naufal said to Muhammad, "So be glad that you are the prophet of this nation" before the Quran. Are these not the ones referred to as "We have sent you" mentioned in the verse above? Reflect on this!</p>
<p class="" data-end="28628" data-start="28312">Muslims claim that Muhammad was sent by their Allah, who is the King of Kings. But when we read the Holy Bible in Revelation 17:14, "They will wage war against the Lamb, but the Lamb will triumph over them because He is Lord of lords and King of kings—and with Him will be His called, chosen and faithful followers."</p>
<p class="" data-end="29389" data-start="28630">In Revelation 19:11-16, "I saw heaven standing open, and there before me was a white horse, whose rider is called Faithful and True. With justice, He judges and wages war. His eyes are like blazing fire, and on His head are many crowns. He has a name written on Him that no one knows but He Himself. He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and His name is the Word of God. The armies of heaven were following Him, riding on white horses and dressed in fine linen, white and clean. Coming out of His mouth is a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. 'He will rule them with an iron scepter.' He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God Almighty. On His robe and on His thigh, He has this name written: King of kings and Lord of lords."</p>
<p class="" data-end="29889" data-start="29391">Jesus Christ is the King of kings and Lord of lords. But when we read the authentic Islamic hadith, they explain that the greatest enemy of Allah (s.w) the God whom Muslims worship is the one called the King of Kings.<br/>
Sahih Al-Bukhari, Volume 8, Hadith No. 225, Al-Lu’lu wal-Marjan, Volume 3, Hadith No. 1385:<br/>
"The hadith of Abu Huraira (r.a) states, 'The Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) said, 'The most disgraceful and wicked name before Allah is a person calling himself Malikul-Amlak (King of Kings).'"</p>
<p class="" data-end="30189" data-start="29891">Therefore, the revelation Muhammad received, which he wants us Christians to believe, did not come from the God we believe in, Jesus Christ. Instead, according to the authentic Islamic books, it originated from being played with by Satan. Therefore, to us, he becomes a false prophet and messenger.</p>
<p class="" data-end="30635" data-start="30191">The Holy Bible has warned us to test the apostles and prophets. In Revelation 2:1-2, "To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands. I know your deeds, your hard work, and your perseverance. I know that you cannot tolerate wicked people, that you have tested those who claim to be apostles but are not, and have found them false."</p>
<p class="" data-end="30839" data-start="30637">According to these verses, Muhammad s.a.w does not deserve to be called a prophet and messenger of the true God, but he falls into the category of false prophets and apostles. He is not suitable for us.</p>
<p class="" data-end="30976" data-start="30841">Contact us for questions, comments, or to seek advice:Shalom,</p>
<p class="" data-end="31054" data-start="30987">Max Shimba, a servant of Jesus Christ, the Almighty God. Titus 2:13</p>

</div>
