# Did Christ's Sacrifice Appease the Father or the entire Godhead? [Part B]

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/qa/appease_b.html)

**Category:** 12 New Common Questions

---

# Did Christ’s Sacrifice Appease the Father or the entire Godhead?

**Part B**

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

It is [now](/articles/12-did_christs_sacrifice_appease_the_father_or_the_entire_godhead_part_a) time to examine the inspired Scriptures to see what they say concerning Christ’s death being a sacrifice which appeases God’s wrath. We will see whether Jesus’ death propitiated the Father’s anger or the entire Godhead collectively. 

According to the NT writings Christ’s sacrificial death saves believers from God’s wrath and judgment:

“But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Since we have now been justified by his blood, how much more shall we be saved **_from God’s wrath_** through him! For if, while we were God’s enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, how much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved through his life! Not only is this so, but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.” Romans 5:8-11

“for they themselves report what kind of reception you gave us. They tell how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead—Jesus, _who rescues us**from the coming wrath**_.” 1 Thessalonians 1:9-10 

“Now, brothers and sisters, about times and dates we do not need to write to you, for you know very well _that**the day of the Lord** will come like a thief in the night_. While people are saying, ‘Peace and safety,’ destruction will come on them suddenly, as labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape… _For God did not appoint us**to suffer wrath** but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ_. He died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him.” 1 Thessalonians 5:1-3, 9-10

This coming wrath from which Jesus saves all who turn to him is variously called “the day of God’s wrath” or “the day of the Lord.” This refers to the time in which God will gather the nations in order to judge them through the Lord Jesus Christ according to all that they have done:

“But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, _you are storing up**wrath** against yourself for **the day of God’s wrath**_ , when his righteous judgment will be revealed. God ‘will repay each person according to what they have done.’ To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life. But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, _there will be wrath and anger_. There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile; but glory, honor and peace for everyone who does good: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile. For God does not show favoritism. All who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law. For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in God’s sight, but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous… This will take place _on**the day** when God judges people’s secrets **through Jesus Christ**_ , as my gospel declares.” Romans 2:5-13, 16

It is a day in which God will pour out his righteous anger upon all the wicked and ungodly when the Lord Jesus returns from heaven to punish them with unquenchable fire:

“But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them: ‘You brood of vipers! _Who warned you to flee**from** **the coming wrath**?_ Produce fruit in keeping with repentance. And do not think you can say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham. The ax is already at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. I baptize you with water for repentance. But after me comes one who is more powerful than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. _He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit**and fire**. His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing floor, gathering his wheat into the barn and burning up the chaff **with unquenchable fire**_.’ Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John. But John tried to deter him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?’ Jesus replied, ‘Let it be so now; it is proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness.’ Then John consented.” Matthew 3:7-15 – cf. Luke 3:7-17

The book of Revelation says that this will be a day in which Christ will make all the ungodly drink from the cup of God’s wrath which will be poured out full strength upon the wicked:

“A third angel followed them and said in a loud voice: ‘If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives its mark on their forehead or on their hand, _they, too, will drink the wine**of** **God’s fury** , which has been poured full strength into the cup **of his wrath**. They will be tormented with burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels **and of the Lamb**_. And the smoke of their torment will rise for ever and ever. There will be no rest day or night for those who worship the beast and its image, or for anyone who receives the mark of its name.’” Revelation 14:9-11 

“The great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. God remembered Babylon the Great _and gave her the cup filled with the wine**of the fury of his wrath**_.” Revelation 16:19 

“The ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but who for one hour will receive authority as kings along with the beast. They have one purpose and will give their power and authority to the beast. _They will wage war against the Lamb,_ _but the Lamb will triumph over them because he is Lord of lords and King of kings_ —and with him will be his called, chosen and faithful followers.” Revelation 17:12-14 

“I saw heaven standing open and there before me was a white horse, whose rider is called Faithful and True. With justice he judges and wages war. His eyes are like blazing fire, and on his head are many crowns. He has a name written on him that no one knows but he himself. He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is the Word of God. The armies of heaven were following him, riding on white horses and dressed in fine linen, white and clean. _Coming out of his mouth is a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. ‘**He will rule them with an iron scepter**.’_ **_He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God Almighty_**. On his robe and on his thigh he has this name written: KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, who cried in a loud voice to all the birds flying in midair, ‘Come, gather together for the great supper of God, _so that you may eat the flesh of kings, generals, and the mighty, of horses and their riders,_ and the flesh of all people, free and slave, great and small.’ _Then I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the rider on the horse and his army_. But the beast was captured, and with it the false prophet who had performed the signs on its behalf. With these signs he had deluded those who had received the mark of the beast and worshiped its image. The two of them were thrown alive into the fiery lake of burning sulfur. _The rest were killed with the sword coming out of the mouth of the rider on the horse_ , and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.” Revelation 19:11-21

The OT has much to say concerning this day as well. For instance, it is a day in which Yahweh will be revealed in fire to pour out his anger upon the nations whom he will gather before him in judgment, as well as save all those who call upon him:

“‘See, the LORD is coming with fire, and his chariots are like a whirlwind; _he will bring down**his anger with fury** , and **his rebuke** with flames of fire_. For with fire and with his sword the LORD will execute judgment on all people, and many will be those slain by the LORD. Those who consecrate and purify themselves to go into the gardens, following one who is among those who eat the flesh of pigs, rats and other unclean things—they will meet their end together with the one they follow,’ declares the LORD. ‘Those who sanctify and purify themselves to go into the gardens, following one in the midst, eating swine’s flesh and the abomination and mice, shall come to an end together, says the Lord. **_For I know their works and their thoughts, and I am coming to gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come and shall see my glory_** ,’” Isaiah 66:15-18 

“And I will give portents in the heavens and on the earth, blood and fire and columns of smoke. The sun shall be turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord comes. _And it shall come to pass that all who call upon the name of the Lord shall be delivered_ ; for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those who escape, as the Lord has said, and among the survivors shall be those whom the Lord calls. For behold, in those days and at that time, when I restore the fortunes of Judah and Jerusalem, _I will gather all the nations and bring them down to the valley of Jehoshaphat, and I will enter into judgment with them there, on account of my people and my heritage Israel_ , because they have scattered them among the nations, and have divided up my land, and have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for a harlot, and have sold a girl for wine, and have drunk it… Hasten and come, all you nations round about, gather yourselves there. Bring down thy warriors, O Lord. Let the nations bestir themselves, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; _for there I will sit to judge all the nations round about_. Put in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Go in, tread, for the wine press is full. The vats overflow, for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of decision! **_For the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision_**. The sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining. And the Lord roars from Zion, and utters his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shake. But the Lord is a refuge to his people, a stronghold to the people of Israel. So you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who dwell in Zion, my holy mountain. And Jerusalem shall be holy and strangers shall never again pass through it.” Joel 2:30-32; 3:1-3, 11-18

This is also described as the time when Yahweh will bring destruction to the rebellious:

“Put on sackcloth, you priests, and mourn; wail, you who minister before the altar. Come, spend the night in sackcloth, you who minister before my God; for the grain offerings and drink offerings are withheld from the house of your God. Declare a holy fast; call a sacred assembly. Summon the elders and all who live in the land to the house of the LORD your God, and cry out to the LORD. _Alas for that day! For**the day of the LORD** is near; it will come like destruction from the Almighty_.” Joel 1:13-15

What makes this all the more amazing is that the NT actually calls this time of judgment the day of the Lord Jesus Christ!

“Therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly wait for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed. He will also keep you firm to the end, so that you will be blameless **_on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ_**.” 1 Corinthians 1:7-8 

“For we do not write you anything you cannot read or understand. And I hope that, as you have understood us in part, you will come to understand fully that you can boast of us just as we will boast of you **_in the day of the Lord Jesus_**.” 2 Corinthians 1:13-14

“I thank my God every time I remember you. In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with joy because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now, being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion **_until the day of Christ Jesus_** … And this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight, so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless **_for the day of Christ_** , filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ—to the glory and praise of God.” Philippians 1:3-6, 9-11

“Do everything without grumbling or arguing, so that you may become blameless and pure, ‘children of God without fault in a warped and crooked generation.’ Then you will shine among them like stars in the sky as you hold firmly to the word of life. And then I will be able to boast **_on the day of Christ_** that I did not run or labor in vain.” Philippians 2:16

The NT further teaches that it is Christ who will be revealed in blazing fire with all his angels in order to gather all the nations. At this time Christ will save all who call on his name and destroy all those who refused to obey the Gospel by repenting of their sins and turning to him as their Lord:

“ _When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne.**Before him will be gathered all the nations** , and he will separate them one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, and he will place the sheep at his right hand, but the goats at the left_. Then **_the King_** will say to those at his right hand, ‘ _Come, O blessed of**my Father** , inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world_; for I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.’ Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink? And when did we see you a stranger and welcome thee, or naked and clothe you? And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ And **_the King_** will answer them, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you did it to me.’ Then he will say to those at his left hand, ‘Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, I was a stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ Then they also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to you?’ Then he will answer them, ‘Truly, I say to you, as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to me.’ And they will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.” Matthew 25:31-46

“When you see Jerusalem being surrounded by armies, you will know that its desolation is near. Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city get out, and let those in the country not enter the city. For this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written. How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers! _There will be great distress in the land and**wrath** against this people_. They will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled on by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. There will be signs in the sun, moon and stars. On the earth, nations will be in anguish and perplexity at the roaring and tossing of the sea. People will faint from terror, apprehensive of what is coming on the world, for the heavenly bodies will be shaken. _At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory_. When these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near… Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, _and that you may be able to stand before the Son of Man_.” Luke 21:20-28, 36

“All this is evidence that God’s judgment is right, and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering. God is just: He will pay back trouble to those who trouble you and give relief to you who are troubled, and to us as well. _This will happen when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven**in blazing fire** with his powerful angels. He will punish those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. They will be punished with **everlasting destruction** and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might on the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all those who have believed_. This includes you, because you believed our testimony to you.” 2 Thessalonians 1:5-10

This identification of Jesus’ return to judge creation with the day in which Yahweh will pour out his righteous anger upon the ungodly basically means that Jesus is Yahweh and that it is his own wrath which will be unleashed upon the wicked. This shows that Christ isn’t simply God’s agent sent to execute God’s fierce anger on all unrepentant sinners. Rather, Christ is coming to unleash his holy indignation upon the evildoers as well. 

In other words, the wrath which Jesus will display is that of the entire Godhead collectively, i.e. it isn’t simply the Father’s righteous indignation which will be manifested on that day but that of the Triune God. 

This point can be seen clearly in Revelation. In certain verses it is the wrath of Lord God Almighty (i.e., the Father) which will be unleashed upon the wicked:

“The seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, which said: ‘ _The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Messiah, and he will reign for ever and ever_.’ And the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before God, fell on their faces and worshiped God, saying: ‘We give thanks to you, Lord God Almighty, the One who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and have begun to reign. The nations were angry, **_and your wrath has come_**. The time has come for judging the dead, and for rewarding your servants the prophets and your people who revere your name, both great and small—and for destroying those who destroy the earth.’ Revelation 11:15-18 – cf. 14:10, 20; 16:1, 19; 19:15

Yet in the following passage it is the wrath of both God and the Lamb that will be poured out upon the world:

“I watched as he opened the sixth seal. There was a great earthquake. The sun turned black like sackcloth made of goat hair, the whole moon turned blood red, and the stars in the sky fell to earth, as figs drop from a fig tree when shaken by a strong wind. The heavens receded like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place. Then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the mighty, and everyone else, both slave and free, hid in caves and among the rocks of the mountains. They called to the mountains and the rocks, ‘Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne a _nd from**the wrath of the Lamb! For the great day of THEIR wrath has come** , and who can withstand it?_’” Revelation 6:12-17

Here we see that “the day of Yahweh,” “the day of God’s wrath,” and “the day of the Lord Jesus Christ,” have now become “the great day of _THEIR_ wrath,” e.g., the day when the holy indignation of the Father and Son will be revealed against all evil and ungodliness. 

There are other texts which refer to the Son coming to destroy the wicked in his anger and wrath:

“Why are the nations in an uproar And the peoples devising a vain thing? The kings of the earth take their stand And the rulers take counsel together Against the LORD and against **_His Anointed (Christ)_** , saying, ‘Let us tear _THEIR_ fetters apart And cast away _THEIR_ cords from us!’ He who sits in the heavens laughs, The Lord scoffs at them. Then He will speak to them in His anger And terrify them in His fury, saying, ‘But as for Me, I have installed My King Upon Zion, My holy mountain.’ I will surely tell of the decree of the LORD: He said to Me, ‘You are My Son, Today I have begotten You. Ask of Me, and I will surely give the nations as Your inheritance, And the very ends of the earth as Your possession. **_You shall break them with a rod of iron, You shall shatter them like earthenware_**.’ Now therefore, O kings, show discernment; Take warning, O judges of the earth. Worship the LORD with reverence And rejoice with trembling. _Do homage (Nashqu – Kiss) to the Son, that He not become**angry** , and you perish in the way, For **HIS wrath** may soon be kindled How blessed are all who take refuge in Him!_” Psalm 2:1-12 NASB

This next passage recalls Yahweh’s promise to David’s Lord that he would be enthroned at Yahweh’s right hand as a priestly King until all his enemies are vanquished under his feet:

“The LORD says to **_my lord_** : ‘ _Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet_.’ The LORD will extend your mighty scepter from Zion, saying, ‘Rule in the midst of your enemies!’ _Your troops will be willing on your day of battle_. Arrayed in holy splendor, your young men will come to you like dew from the morning’s womb. The LORD has sworn and will not change his mind: You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek.’ **_The Lord is at your right hand_** _; he will crush kings on**the day of HIS wrath**. He will judge the nations, heaping up the dead and crushing the rulers of the whole earth_. He will drink from a brook along the way, and so he will lift his head high.” Psalm 110:1-5

It is clear from the context that it is David’s Lord at Yahweh’s right hand who crushes kings on the day of his wrath. This is brought out more clearly in the footnote to this particular translation:

c. Psalm 110:5 Or _My lord is at your right hand, LORD_

The following Jewish Christian author shows from the context that it is clearly David’s Lord who will destroy rulers in his wrath:

“… Unlike v. 1, where the vowels used generally (although not exclusively) indicate a human master (_’adoni_) rather than God, in v. 5 the vowels indicate that it is certainly a Divine Master being described. This has led many commentators to assume that this is not the King at Yahweh’s right hand but instead Yahweh at the King’s right hand.57

“**Yet it is better to view this as the King at the right hand of God. First, grammatically, all the third-person singular pronouns in vv. 5-7 refer back to the Lord (_’adonay)_**. 

The Lord [_’adonay_ , the messianic king] is at Your right hand; 

_He_ will crush kings on the day of _His_ anger. 

_He_ will judge the nations, heaping up corpses; 

_He_ will crush leaders over the entire world. 

_He_ will drink from the brook by the road; 

therefore, _He_ will lift up His head. 

“**Plainly, it is the King who battles and drinks. Since there is no change in subject, it is the King who is called the Divine Lord (_‘adonay_) in v. 5**. Edward J. Kissane notes the error of understanding _’adonay_ as Yahweh while taking the third singular pronouns that follow as referring to the King: ‘This introduces a change in subject of which there is no indication in the text. If the Messiah is the subject of v. 7, he must also be the subject of the preceding verses.’58

“Secondly, just as it is the Lord (_’adoni_) who is seated at the right hand of God in v. 1, **so He is once again described in v. 5 as the one who is on the right hand of God. As Perowne says, ‘It is hardly probable that in so short a Psalm the King should first be said (ver. 1) to be at the right hand of Jehovah, and then that in ver. 5 Jehovah, on the contrary, should be said to be at the right hand of the King**.’59 The logical conclusion is that the King is called ‘the Lord’ (_’adonay_), a title reserved for God alone. While it is possible to object that the King would not have been granted a divine title, there are implications of the King’s deity throughout the psalm. In light of Ps 45:6 saying to the King, ‘Your throne, God, is forever and ever,’ therein calling Him ‘God’ (_’elohim_), why is it so objectionable, apart from dogmatic presupposition, for Him to be called ‘Lord’ (_’adonay_) in this one? 

“Thus, in 110:5-6 the victorious Divine Messiah is graphically depicted defeating all who have rebelled against God. He crushes kings and rulers, judges the people (nations), and heaps up corpses, indicating that no rebels will escape. The violence of the imagery recalls Isa 63:1-6, **where the messianic King tramples through the winepress of the nations, staining His garments with blood and crushing nations in His anger. 60 The psalmist says all this will occur on ‘the day of His anger,’ with the pronoun ‘His’ referring to the King**. Since the phrase ‘day of anger’ (_yom ’ap_) occurs in only six verses in Scripture61 and in each case it refers to God’s wrath, **this would imply that the triumphant King is indeed a divine King.** 62” (Michael Rydelnik, _[Messianic Hope: Is the Hebrew Bible Really Messianic?](<http://books.google.com/books?id=3hm6YdykoKUC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false>)_ [B&H Publishing Group, Nashville, TN 2010], pp. 178-179; bold emphasis ours)

According to the NT these texts find their fulfillment in Christ’s enthronement and subsequent return to the earth where he will rule the nations with an iron scepter:

“While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, ‘Why do the teachers of the law say that the Messiah is the son of David? David himself, speaking by the Holy Spirit, declared: “The Lord said to **_my Lord_** : ‘** _Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet_**.’” David himself calls him “Lord.” How then can he be his son?’ The large crowd listened to him with delight.” Mark 12:35-37 

“In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways, but in these last days he has spoken to us _by his Son,**whom he appointed heir of all things** , and through whom also he made the universe. The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact representation of his being, sustaining all things by his powerful word. After he had provided purification for sins,_ **_he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in heaven_**. So he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs. For to which of the angels did God ever say, ‘** _You are my Son; today I have become your Father’_**? Or again, ‘ _I will be his Father, and he will be my Son’_? And again, when God brings his firstborn into the world, he says, ‘ _Let all God’s angels worship him_.’ … But about the Son he says, ‘ _Your throne, O God, will last for ever and ever; a scepter of justice will be the scepter of your kingdom. You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore God, your God, has set you above your companions by anointing you with the oil of joy_.’ He also says, ‘ _In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands. They will perish, but you remain; they will all wear out like a garment. You will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed. But you remain the same, and your years will never end_.’ To which of the angels did God ever say, ‘ _Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet’_?” Hebrews 1:1-5, 7-13 – cf. 5:5-6; 8:1-2; 10:12; 12:2 

“A great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head. She was pregnant and cried out in pain as she was about to give birth. Then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads. Its tail swept a third of the stars out of the sky and flung them to the earth. The dragon stood in front of the woman who was about to give birth, so that it might devour her child the moment he was born. She gave birth to a son, a male child, _who ‘**will rule all the nations with an iron scepter**.’ And her child was snatched up to God and to his throne_… Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say: ‘ _Now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God,**and the authority of his Messiah**_. For the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our God day and night, has been hurled down.’” Revelation 12:1-5, 10 

“Coming out of his mouth is a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. ‘** _He will rule them with an iron scepter_**.’ He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God Almighty.” Revelation 19:15 – cf. 2:18, 26-27

These verses shouldn’t surprise us since we should actually expect that Christ will come to also pour out his wrath upon unrepentant sinners. After all, sin is just as much an offense to the Lord Jesus as it is to the Father or the Holy Spirit. 

The Gospels themselves record several instances where Jesus got rather angry and upset over the transgressions and stubbornness of the people:

“Another time Jesus went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there. Some of them were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal him on the Sabbath. Jesus said to the man with the shriveled hand, ‘Stand up in front of everyone.’ Then Jesus asked them, ‘Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?’ But they remained silent. **_He looked around at them in anger and, deeply distressed at their stubborn hearts_** , said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out, and his hand was completely restored.” Mark 3:1-5 

“People were bringing little children to Jesus for him to place his hands on them, but the disciples rebuked them. **_When Jesus saw this, he was indignant_**. He said to them, ‘Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. Truly I tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.’ And he took the children in his arms, placed his hands on them and blessed them.” Mark 10:13-16 

“On a Sabbath Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues, and a woman was there who had been crippled by a spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not straighten up at all. When Jesus saw her, he called her forward and said to her, ‘Woman, you are set free from your infirmity.’ Then he put his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and praised God. Indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, the synagogue leader said to the people, ‘There are six days for work. So come and be healed on those days, not on the Sabbath.’ _The Lord answered him, ‘**You hypocrites!**_ Doesn’t each of you on the Sabbath untie your ox or donkey from the stall and lead it out to give it water? Then should not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has kept bound for eighteen long years, be set free on the Sabbath day from what bound her?’ When he said this, all his opponents were humiliated, but the people were delighted with all the wonderful things he was doing.” Luke 13:10-17 

“When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, Jesus went up to Jerusalem. In the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and doves, and others sitting at tables exchanging money. _So he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables_. To those who sold doves he said, ‘ _Get these out of here! Stop turning my Father’s house into a market!_ ’ His disciples remembered that it is written: ‘Zeal for your house will consume me.’” John 2:13-17 – cf. Matthew 21:12-13; Mark 11:15-17; Luke 19:45-46

With the foregoing in perspective it is abundantly clear that Christ’s sacrifice didn’t simply appease the wrath of God the Father. Rather, the Lord’s atoning death removed the righteous anger of the Godhead collectively. The wrath which the Father poured out, and which the Son absorbed, was the indignation which the Triune God feels towards those who persist in their disobedience and rebellion. 

So to answer the question, the Lord Jesus offered himself to the Father in order to satisfy the perfect righteousness and holiness of the Triune God. The Father accepted his Son’s vicarious death on behalf of the Godhead collectively. 

However, there is more to the story so please continue to [Part C](/articles/12-did_christs_sacrifice_appease_the_father_or_the_entire_godhead_part_c).
