# Does the fact that the Bible distinguishes Jesus from God disprove his Deity?

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/qa/jesus_god_distinct.html)

**Category:** 12 New Common Questions

---

# Does the fact that the Bible distinguishes Jesus from God disprove his Deity?

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

**Question:**

**Throughout the NT Jesus is distinguished from God. This can especially be seen from Paul’s writings since he starts his epistles by mentioning God and Christ, e.g., “Paul, a servant of _Christ Jesus_ , called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel _of God_ … Grace and peace to you from God our Father _AND_ from the Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. 1:1, 7). Since the NT repeatedly differentiates God from Christ doesn’t this prove that Jesus is not and cannot be God?**

**Answer:**

The question or objection confuses and compounds several issues. It equivocates on the word God, assuming that it has the same meaning in every context, thereby confusing the difference between sense and reference. However, the word God can have a different sense or meaning depending upon the referent or the context in which it is used. 

This leads us to the second problem with the question. All throughout the NT the term God commonly functions as a proper name for the Father, much like the word Lord is commonly used as a title or as part of Jesus’ name, i.e. “the Lord Jesus Christ.” In fact, in every single place where Jesus is distinguished from God it is a distinction between the Father and the Son just as the following passages affirm:

“Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of **_God_** , which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures, concerning **_his Son_** , who was descended from David according to the flesh and was declared to be **_the Son of God_** in power according to the Spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the nations, including you who are called to belong to Jesus Christ, To all those in Rome who are loved by **_God_** and called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from **_God our Father_** and the Lord Jesus Christ.” Romans 1:1-7

“For **_God_** has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do. By sending **_his own Son_** in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh… What then shall we say to these things? If **_God_** is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare **_his own Son_** but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things? Who shall bring any charge against **_God_** ’s elect? It is **_God_** who justifies. Who is to condemn? Christ Jesus is the one who died—more than that, who was raised— who is at the right hand of **_God_** , who indeed is interceding for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? … For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of **_God_** in Christ Jesus our Lord.” Romans 8:3, 28-35, 38-39

“For **_God_** __ so loved the world, that he gave **_his only Son_** , that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life. For **_God_** did not send **_his Son_** into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of **_the only Son of God_**.” John 3:16-18

God in the above passages is clearly the Father. Since Trinitarianism affirms that the Father and Son are personally distinct we therefore see no problem with the NT distinguishing God from Christ. 

God is also used to refer to the nature that the Son shares in common with his Father. In other words, when the NT applies God to Christ it is in the sense of predication, affirming that Christ has the nature of God and fully possesses all the Divine qualities. Here is an example:

“In the beginning was the Word, **_and the Word was with the God (kai ho logos een pros ton theon), and the Word was God (kai theos een ho logos)_**. **_He was in the beginning with the God (houtos een en arche pros ton theon)_**… And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, **_glory as of the only Son from the Father_**, full of grace and truth… No one has ever seen **_God_** ; the only Son, **_who is God_** , who is in the bosom of **_the Father_** , he has made him known” John 1:1-2, 14, 18

In this particular context John states that the Word was with the God and was God. The use of the definite article before God, i.e., _ton theon_ , indicates that the Word was having intimate fellowship with a specific entity commonly referred to or known as God, which in this case would be the Father. John then goes on to describe the Word as being essentially God. According to Greek NT scholars by placing the noun _theos_ before the verb “was” (_een_) John is emphasizing and laying stress on the qualities or nature of the Word:

The nominative case is the case that the subject is in. When the subject takes an equative verb like “is” (i.e., a verb that equates the subject with something else), then another noun also appears in the nominative case–the predicate nominative. In the sentence, “John is a man,” “John” is the subject and “man” is the predicate nominative. In English the subject and predicate nominative are distinguished by word order (the subject comes first). Not so in Greek. Since word order in Greek is quite flexible and is used for emphasis rather than for strict grammatical function, other means are used to determine subject from predicate nominative. For example, if one of the two nouns has the definite article, it is the subject.

As we have said, word order is employed especially for the sake of emphasis. Generally speaking, when a word is thrown to the front of the clause it is done so for emphasis. _When a predicate nominative is thrown in front of the verb, by virtue of word order it takes on emphasis_. A good illustration of this is John 1:1c. The English versions typically have, “and the Word was God.” But in Greek, the word order has been reversed. It reads,

_kai theos en ho logos_  
and God was the Word.

We know that “the Word” is the subject because it has the definite article, and we translate it accordingly: “and the Word was God.” Two questions, both of theological import, should come to mind: (1) why was _theos_ thrown forward? and (2) why does it lack the article? _In brief, its emphatic position stresses its essence or quality: “What God was, the Word was” is how one translation brings out this force_. Its lack of a definite article keeps us from identifying the _person_ of the Word (Jesus Christ) with the _person_ of “God” (the Father). _That is to say, the word order tells us that Jesus Christ has all the divine attributes that the Father has; lack of the article tells us that Jesus Christ is not the Father. John's wording here is beautifully compact! It is, in fact, one of the most elegantly terse theological statements one could ever find_. As Martin Luther said, the lack of the article is against Sabellianism; the word order is against Arianism.__

_kai ho logos en ho theos_ “and the Word was the God” (i.e., the Father; Sabellianism)__

_kai ho logos en theos_ “and the Word was a god” (Arianism)__

_kai theos en ho logos_ “and the Word was God” (Orthodoxy).

_Jesus Christ is God and has all the attributes that the Father has_. But he is not the first person of the Trinity. _All this is concisely affirmed in _kai theos en ho logos__. (William D. Mounce, _Basics of Biblical Greek Grammar_[Zondervan Publishing House, Grand Rapids, MI 1993], Chapter 6. Nominative and Accusative Definite Article (First and Second Declension), pp. 28-29; underline emphasis ours)

That the God whom Jesus is distinguished from is the Father can be seen not only from the context of John 1 which specifically mentions the word Father but also from John’s first epistle:

“That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning **_the Word of Life—the Life_** was made manifest, and we have seen it, and testify to it and proclaim to you **_the Eternal Life, which was with the Father (hetis een pros ton patera)_** and was made manifest to us— that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us; **_and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ_**. And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete. This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, **_that God is light_**, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say we have fellowship with him while we walk in darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, **_and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin_**.” 1 John 1:1-7

Here the God whom the Word of Life/Life/Eternal Life has been fellowshipping with from the beginning is expressly said to be the Father. 

It is therefore evident from the foregoing that John was saying that Jesus is the eternal Word who was with God the Father before creation and who existed as God in essence. Hence, Jesus as the preexistent Word is both distinct from and identical to God. 

The following Biblical analogy should prove helpful. According to the Hebrew Bible the word Adam is the name that God initially gave to both the man and the woman:

“Then God said, ‘Let us make **_Adam_** in our image, after our likeness. And let **_THEM_** have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.’ So God created **_Adam (ha adam)_** in his own image, in the image of God he created him; **_male and female he created them_**.” Genesis 1:26-27

“This is the book of the generations of Adam. When God created **_Adam_** , he made him in the likeness of God. **_Male and female he created them_** , and he blessed them **_and named THEM Adam when they were created_**.” Genesis 5:1-2

The prophetic Scriptures also use the term to refer to mankind in general:

“But you shall not eat flesh with its life, that is, its blood. And for your lifeblood I will require a reckoning: from every beast I will require it and from **_Adam (ha adam)_**. From his fellow **_Adam (ha adam)_** I will require a reckoning for the life of **_Adam (ha adam)_**. Whoever sheds the blood of **_Adam (ha adam)_** , by **_Adam_** shall his blood be shed, for God made **_Adam (ha adam)_** in his own image.” Genesis 9:4-6

At the same time Adam is also used as a name for the first male, particularly in contexts where he is distinguished from his wife:

“And they heard the sound of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, **_and Adam (ha adam) and his wife_** hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden. But the LORD God called to **_Adam (ha adam)_** and said to him, ‘Where are you?’ And he said, ‘I heard the sound of you in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself.’ He said, ‘Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?’ **_Adam (ha adam)_** said, ‘The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.’ Then the LORD God said to the woman, ‘What is this that you have done?’ The woman said, ‘The serpent deceived me, and I ate.’ … And to **_Adam_** he said, ‘Because you have listened to the voice of **_your wife_** and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, “You shall not eat of it,” cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life; thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, **_till you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you shall return_**.’ **_Adam (ha adam)_** called **_his wife’s_** name Eve, because she was the mother of all living. And the LORD God made for **_Adam_** and for **_his wife_** garments of skins and clothed them. Then the LORD God said, ‘Behold, **_Adam (ha adam)_** has become like one of us in knowing good and evil. Now, lest **_he_** reach out **_his_** hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever—’ therefore the LORD God sent **_him_** out from the garden of Eden to work **_the ground from which he was taken_**. He drove out **_Adam (ha adam)_** , and at the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim and a flaming sword that turned every way to guard the way to the tree of life. **_Now Adam (ha adam) knew Eve his wife_** , and she conceived and bore Cain, saying, ‘I have gotten a man with the help of the LORD.’” Genesis 3:9-13, 17-24; 4:1

“** _And Adam knew his wife again_** , and she bore a son and called his name Seth, for she said, ‘God has appointed for me another offspring instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.’” Genesis 4:25

“When **_Adam_** had lived 130 years, **_he fathered a son in his own likeness, after his image_** , and named him Seth. The days of **_Adam after he fathered Seth_** were 800 years; and he had other sons and daughters. Thus all the days that **_Adam_** lived were 930 years, and he died.” Genesis 5:3-5

Thus, Adam can have a different sense depending on the referent or context. This is why Eve can be said to be with Adam while also being called Adam! She was both personally distinguishable from and identical to Adam! 

In fact, the prophetic Scriptures further proclaim that Adam and Eve would actually become one flesh through their sexual union:

“Now out of the ground the LORD God had formed every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens and brought them to **_Adam (ha adam)_** to see what he would call them. And whatever **_Adam (ha adam)_** called every living creature, that was its name. **_Adam (ha adam)_** gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for **_Adam (ha adam)_** there was not found a helper fit for him. So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon **_Adam (ha adam)_** , and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh. And the rib that the LORD God had taken from **_Adam (ha adam)_** he made into a woman and brought her to Adam (ha adam). Then **_Adam (ha adam)_** said, ‘This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman (_isshah_) because she was taken out of Man (_ish_).’ Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, **_and they shall become one flesh (basar echad)_**. And **_Adam (ha adam)_** and **_his wife_** were both naked and were not ashamed.” Genesis 2:19-25

The word used for one is _echad_ , the same word used in the _Shema_ in respect to God’s unity:

“Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, **_the LORD is one (Yahweh echad)_**.” Deuteronomy 6:4

According to the inspired Scriptures the one Lord God exists as a plurality of Divine Persons – three to be exact – who are capable of carrying out the exclusive works of God and whom all believers must swear allegiance and devote themselves entirely to:

“Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them **_in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit_** ,” Matthew 28:19

“My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. **_I give them eternal life_** , and they will never perish, **_and no one will snatch them out of my hand_**. My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, **_and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand. I and the Father, we are one (hen esmen)_**. John 10:27-30

“You, however, are not in the flesh but in **_the Spirit_** , if in fact **_the Spirit of God dwells in you_**. Anyone who does not have **_the Spirit of Christ_** does not belong to him. **_But if Christ is in you_**, although the body is dead because of sin, **_the Spirit is life_** because of righteousness. If **_the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you_**. So, then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. For if you live according to the flesh you will die, but if **_by the Spirit_** you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. For all who are led **_by the Spirit of God_** are sons of God. For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received **_the Spirit of adoption_** as sons, by whom we cry, ‘Abba! Father!’ **_The Spirit himself_** bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs—heirs of … Likewise **_the Spirit helps us_** in our weakness. For we do not know what to pray for as we ought, **_but the Spirit himself intercedes for us_** with groanings too deep for words. **_And he who searches hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God_**… Who is to condemn? **_Christ Jesus_** is the one who died—more than that, who was raised— who is at the right hand of God, **_who indeed is interceding for us_**.” Romans 8:9-17, 26-27, 34

“Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some of you. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified **_in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God_**.” 1 Corinthians 6:9-11 

“Therefore I want you to understand that no one speaking **_in the Spirit of God_** ever says ‘Jesus is accursed!’ and no one can say ‘** _Jesus is Lord_** ’ except in **_the Holy Spirit_**. Now there are varieties of gifts, **_but the same Spirit_**; and there are varieties of service, **_but the same Lord_**; and there are varieties of activities, **_but it is the same God who empowers them all in everyone_**. To each is given **_the manifestation of the Spirit_** for the common good. For to one is given **_through the Spirit_** the utterance of wisdom, and to another the utterance of knowledge **_according to the same Spirit_**, to another faith **_by the same Spirit_**, to another gifts of healing **_by the one Spirit_**, to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another the ability to distinguish between spirits, to another various kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. **_All these are empowered by one and the same Spirit, who apportions to each one individually as he wills … And God has appointed in the church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, helping, administrating, and various kinds of tongues_**. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles? Do all possess gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? But earnestly desire the higher gifts.” 1 Corinthians 12:3-11, 28-31 

“I therefore, a prisoner **_for the Lord_**, urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling to which you have been called, with all humility and gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another in love, eager to maintain **_the unity of the Spirit_** in the bond of peace. There is one body and **_one Spirit_** — just as you were called to the one hope that belongs to your call — **_one Lord_** , one faith, one baptism, **_one God and Father of all_** , who is over all and through all and in all. **_But grace was given to each one of us according to the measure of Christ’s gift_**. Therefore it says, ‘When he ascended on high he led a host of captives, and he gave gifts to men.’ (In saying, ‘He ascended,’ what does it mean but that he had also descended into the lower regions, the earth? He who descended **_is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.) And he [Christ] gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the shepherds and teachers, to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Christ_**, until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, so that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro by the waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by human cunning, by craftiness in deceitful schemes. Rather, speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, from whom the whole body, joined and held together by every joint with which it is equipped, when each part is working properly, makes the body grow so that it builds itself up in love.” Ephesians 4:1-7, 10-16 – cf. 2:11-22

“The grace **_of the Lord Jesus Christ_** and the love **_of God_** and the fellowship **_of the Holy Spirit_** be with you all.” 2 Corinthians 13:14

“Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To those who are elect exiles of the dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, according to the foreknowledge **_of God the Father_** , in the sanctification **_of the Spirit_** , for obedience **_to Jesus Christ_** and for sprinkling **_with his blood_** : May grace and peace be multiplied to you.” 1 Peter 1:1-3

Therefore, much like Adam is a community of distinct persons who are called to have fellowship with one another in a similar way the one eternal God is also a community of three distinct Divine Persons who have fellowship and communion with one another.**(1)**

Returning back to our analogy, we saw how the word Adam can have a different sense or meaning depending upon the context. In certain passages it refers to the common humanity shared by both the male and female, as well as by human beings in general. Yet in other contexts Adam functions as a proper name for the first male thereby distinguishing him from Eve his wife. 

In a similar way the word God can have a different sense depending upon the referent or context in which it appears. The NT commonly uses God for the Father and therefore functions as the Father’s proper name. As such it serves to distinguish the Father from the Son as well as affirming the fact that the Son is subject to the Father in terms of authority. As noted NT Scholar Murray J. Harris explains:

“First, in all strands of the NT, **_theos_ generally signifies the Father**… When we find the expression _theos pater_ we may legitimately deduce that _ho theos estin ho pater_. And since _pater_ refers to a particular person (not an attribute), **the identity between _ho theos_ and _ho pater_ _as proper names_ referring to persons must be numerical. 'God' must be equated with 'the Father.'** If Jesus were everywhere called _theos_ so that in reference to him the term ceased to be a title and became a proper noun like _'Iesous_ , linguistic ambiguity would be everywhere present.

“Another reason why _theos_ regularly denotes the Father and rarely the Son **is that such a usage is suited to protect the personal distinction between the Son and Father… which is preserved everywhere in the NT** , but nowhere more dramatically than where the Father is called 'the God of our Lord Jesus Christ' (Eph. 1:17) or 'his God and Father' (Rev. 1:6) and where Jesus speaks of 'My God' (Matt. 27:46; Mark 15:34; John 20:17; cf. Rev. 3:2, 12), or, in an address to Jesus reference is made to 'your God' (Heb. 1:9). God was the one to whom Jesus prayed, the one he called his Father (e.g., Matt. 11:25). It was _ho logos_ , not _ho theos_ , of whom John said _sarx egeneto_ (John 1:14).

“Clearly related to this second reason is a third. The element of 'subordinationism' that finds expression not only in the four authors who use _theos_ as a christological appellation but also elsewhere in the NT may have checked any impulse to use _theos_ regularly of Jesus. By customarily reserving the term _theos_ for the Father, NT writers were highlighting the fact, whether consciously or unconsciously, **that while the Son is 'subordinate' to the Father, the Father is not 'subordinate' to the Son**. One finds the expression 'the Son of God' where God is the Father, but never 'the Father of God' where God is the Son.

“A fourth reason that may be suggested for the comparatively rare use of _theos_ as a christological ascription was the danger recognized by the early church that if _theos_ were applied to Jesus as regularly as to the Father, Jews would have tended to regard Christianity as incurably deuterotheological and Gentiles would probably have viewed it as polytheistic. If _theos_ were the personal name of the Father _and_ the Son, Christians would have been hard pressed to defend the faith against charges of ditheism, if not polytheism, however adamant their insistence on their retention of monotheism.

“Fifth, behind the impulse generally to reserve the term _theos_ for the Father lay the need to safeguard the real humanity of Jesus against docetic or monophysitic sentiment in its embryonic form. In the early years of the church there was a greater danger that the integrity of the human ‘nature’ of Jesus should be denied than that his divinity should be called into question, witness the fact that docetism not Arianism was the first christological deviation.

“Finally, the relative infrequency of the use of _theos_ for Jesus corresponds to the relatively infrequent use of ontological categories in NT Christology which is functional in emphasis…” (Harris, _Jesus As God - The New Testament Use of Theos in Reference to Jesus_ [Baker Books; Grand Rapids, MI; July 1998, Paperback], pp. 282-283; bold emphasis ours)

At the same time there are certain places where God is used to describe the nature or qualities that Christ has and shares in common with the Father. This, therefore, affirms that the distinction between God and Jesus is not in respect to their nature but in regards to their Persons, i.e., Jesus is personally distinct from God the Father while being equal to him in essence. 

Hence, just because the Son is distinguished from God doesn’t prove that the Son isn’t God anymore than Eve being distinguished from Adam proves that she isn’t Adam as well. 

**  
Further Reading**

[The Real Truth of John 1:1](/articles/4-the_truth_of_john_11)[  
A Brief Rebuttal to Anti-Missionary Attacks on the Trinity](https://answeringislam.info/Responses/Osama/spirit1_r1.htm)  
[“Let us make man” and the Cohortative Mood](https://answeringislam.info/authors/shamoun/rebuttals/ibnanwar/genesis1_cohortative_mood.html)  
[Trinity Proof Texts](<http://www.bible.ca/trinity/trinity-texts-john1-1.htm>)

  
**Endnotes**

**(1)** Now there are obviously profound differences between God and man so that one shouldn’t press this analogy too far. For instance, God is uncreated whereas man is temporal. Man is a physical being whereas God is not physical and doesn’t have physical organs or private parts. Man is also a sexual being commanded to procreate whereas God is not sexual and does not procreate. Thus, although Adam and Eve became one flesh through sexual union the Father and Son are one in a different sense; nor did the Father and Son have to come together to become one since they have always been one. Moreover, man is composed of both male and female elements whereas there is no female entity within the Godhead, a goddess so to speak. Finally, Adam and Eve are not just distinct persons but also distinct beings, whereas the Father and Son are distinct Persons who share the same eternal Being.
