# Is the Prophet Daniel Worshiped as God?

**Source:** [Answering Islam](https://answeringislam.info/Shamoun/worship_nebudan.htm)

**Category:** 04 Christological Issues

---

### Is the Prophet Daniel Worshiped as God?

[Sam Shamoun](https://www.youtube.com/@shamounian)

  


In order to undermine the explicit New Testament teaching that Jesus Christ is [worshiped as God](/articles/4-the_new_testament_on_the_worship_given_to_jesus_its_significance_and_implication), certain Muslims ([1](<http://www.answering-christianity.com/sami_zaatri/is_daniel_god.htm>), [2](<http://www.answering-christianity.com/bassam_zawadi/lord_of_sabbath_rebuttal.htm>)) have turned to the book of Daniel to show that the prophet Daniel received the worship belonging to God:

> "_**Then King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face,_prostrate before Daniel_ , and commanded that they should present _an offering and incense_ to him**_. The king answered Daniel, and said, ‘Truly your God _is_ the God of gods, the Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, since you could reveal this secret.’ Then the king promoted Daniel and gave him many great gifts; and he made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief administrator over all the wise _men_ of Babylon. _Also Daniel petitioned the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-Nego over the affairs of the province of Babylon_ ; but Daniel _sat_ in the gate of the king." Daniel 2:46-49 NKJV

On this basis they contend that if Jesus is God because he is worshiped then Daniel must have been God also.

The keen reader can see the problems with this exposition. To begin with, quoting a text where a human being is worshiped as God doesn’t refute the Deity of the Lord; at most it may be considered evidence that there is another Divine member of the Godhead besides the Father, Son and Holy Spirit which would make it a Quadranity as opposed to a Trinity!

Second, we must not forget that just because the Bible writers record a specific story this doesn’t mean that they necessarily approved of it. The Bible is an accurate record which reports certain events and conversations which it does not necessarily agree with or condone.

With that said we draw the readers’ attention to the fact that it is a pagan king who offers sacrifices to the prophet, not a righteous God-fearing monotheist. It was (and still is) typical amongst pagans to believe in the divinity of human beings, and on that basis worship them. In fact, the Babylonian rulers thought of themselves as divine beings:

> "Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon; sit on the ground without a throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans! For you shall no more be called tender and delicate… Now therefore hear this, you lover of pleasures, who sit securely, who say in your heart, ‘ _**I am, and there is no one besides me**_ ; I shall not sit as a widow or know the loss of children’: … You felt secure in your wickedness, you said, ‘No one sees me’; your wisdom and your knowledge led you astray, and you said in your heart, ‘ _**I am, and there is no one besides me**_.’" Isaiah 47:1, 8, 10

The book of Daniel shows that it took sometime before Nebuchadnezzar came to the conclusion that Yahweh alone is God and worthy of worship. In fact, some time after the incident reported in the above passage, we read of Daniel warning Nebuchadnezzar that God was about to punish him because of his sins and his failure to acknowledge Yahweh alone as his sovereign:

> "Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was dismayed for a while, and his thoughts alarmed him. The king answered and said, ‘Belteshazzar, let not the dream or the interpretation alarm you.’ Belteshazzar answered and said, ‘My lord, may the dream be for those who hate you and its interpretation for your enemies! The tree you saw, which grew and became strong, so that its top reached to heaven, and it was visible to the end of the whole earth, whose leaves were beautiful and its fruit abundant, and in which was food for all, under which beasts of the field found shade, and in whose branches the birds of the heavens lived-- it is you, O king, who have grown and become strong. Your greatness has grown and reaches to heaven, and your dominion to the ends of the earth. And because the king saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven and saying, "Chop down the tree and destroy it, but leave the stump of its roots in the earth, bound with a band of iron and bronze, in the tender grass of the field, and let him be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven periods of time pass over him," this is the interpretation, O king: It is a decree of the Most High, which has come upon my lord the king, that you shall be driven from among men, and your dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. You shall be made to eat grass like an ox, and you shall be wet with the dew of heaven, and seven periods of time shall pass over you, _**till you know that the Most High rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whom he will**_. And as it was commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, your kingdom shall be confirmed for you _**from the time that you know that Heaven rules**_. Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you: break off your sins by practicing righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the oppressed, that there may perhaps be a lengthening of your prosperity.’" Daniel 4:19-27

After experiencing punishment Nebuchadnezzar came to his senses and realized that Yahweh alone is God:

> "At the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted my eyes to heaven, and my reason returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised and honored him who lives forever, for his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom endures from generation to generation; all the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing, and he does according to his will among the host of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand or say to him, ‘What have you done?’ At the same time my reason returned to me, and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and splendor returned to me. My counselors and my lords sought me, and I was established in my kingdom, and still more greatness was added to me. Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, for all his works are right and his ways are just; and those who walk in pride he is able to humble." Daniel 4:34-37

It should therefore not surprise us that prior to Nebuchadnezzar’s realization that Yahweh alone is worthy to be worshiped he would be found rendering worship to a human being. Nebuchadnezzar even tried to force individuals to worship a golden image at one time:

> "And the herald proclaimed aloud, ‘You are commanded, O peoples, nations, and languages, that when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, _**you are to fall down and _worship_ the golden image**_ that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up. _**And whoever does not fall down and _worship_**_ shall immediately be cast into a burning fiery furnace.’ Therefore, as soon as all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, all the peoples, nations, and languages _**fell down and _worshiped_ the golden image**_ that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. Therefore at that time certain Chaldeans came forward and maliciously accused the Jews. They declared to King Nebuchadnezzar, ‘O king, live forever! You, O king, have made a decree, that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, shall fall down and worship the golden image. And whoever does not fall down and worship shall be cast into a burning fiery furnace. There are certain Jews whom you have appointed over the affairs of the province of Babylon: Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. These men, O king, pay no attention to you; __they do not serve your gods or**worship** the golden image that you have set up__.’ Then Nebuchadnezzar in furious rage commanded that Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego be brought. So they brought these men before the king. Nebuchadnezzar answered and said to them, ‘Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you do not serve my gods or worship the golden image that I have set up? Now if you are ready when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, lyre, trigon, harp, bagpipe, and every kind of music, to fall down and worship the image that I have made, well and good. But if you do not worship, you shall immediately be cast into a burning fiery furnace. __And who is the god who will deliver you out of my hands?__ ’ Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the king, ‘O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter. If this be so, _**our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of your hand**_ , O king. But if not, be it known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or __**worship**__ the golden image that you have set up.’" Daniel 3:4-18
> 
> "And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell bound into the burning fiery furnace. Then King Nebuchadnezzar was astonished and rose up in haste. He declared to his counselors, ‘Did we not cast three men bound into the fire?’ They answered and said to the king, ‘True, O king.’ He answered and said, ‘But I see four men unbound, walking in the midst of the fire, and they are not hurt; _**and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods**_.’ Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the door of the burning fiery furnace; he declared, ‘Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the Most High God, come out, and come here!’ Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out from the fire. And the satraps, the prefects, the governors, and the king's counselors gathered together and saw that the fire had not had any power over the bodies of those men. The hair of their heads was not singed, their cloaks were not harmed, and no smell of fire had come upon them. Nebuchadnezzar answered and said, ‘ _**Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his angel and delivered his servants, who trusted in him, and set aside the king’s command, and yielded up their bodies**_ _**rather than serve and _worship_ any god except their own God**_. Therefore I make a decree: Any people, nation, or language that speaks anything against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego shall be torn limb from limb, and their houses laid in ruins, _**for there is no other god who is able to rescue in this way**_.’ Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon." Daniel 3:23-30

Notice that Daniel’s God-fearing friends expressly refused to worship any image since, as monotheists, they knew that Yahweh alone is God and worthy of their worship and service. As Jews they would have known from the inspired writings such as the books of Moses:

> "in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, perceived _**in the books**_ the number of years that, _**according to the word of the LORD to Jeremiah the prophet**_ , must pass before the end of the desolations of Jerusalem, namely, seventy years… All Israel has transgressed your law and turned aside, refusing to obey your voice. And the curse and oath _**that are written in the Law of Moses the servant of God**_ have been poured out upon us, because we have sinned against him… _**As it is written in the Law of Moses**_ , all this calamity has come upon us; yet we have not entreated the favor of the LORD our God, turning from our iniquities and gaining insight by your truth." Daniel 9:2, 11, 13

That all sacrifices and worship had to be offered to God alone:

> "I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. _**You shall have no other gods before me**_. You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. _**You shall not bow down to them or serve them**_ , for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments." Exodus 20:1-6
> 
> "Then you shall take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram, and you shall kill the ram and shall take its blood and throw it against the sides of the altar. Then you shall cut the ram into pieces, and wash its entrails and its legs, and put them with its pieces and its head, and burn the whole ram on the altar. It is a burnt offering to the LORD. __**It is a pleasing aroma**__ , a food offering to the LORD… Then you shall take them from their hands and burn them on the altar on top of the burnt offering, __**as a pleasing aroma before the LORD**__. It is a food offering to the LORD." Exodus 29:15-18, 25
> 
> "Then Moses took them from their hands and burned them on the altar with the burnt offering. This was an ordination offering __**with a pleasing aroma**__ , a food offering to the LORD." Leviticus 8:28
> 
> "The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, ‘Speak to the people of Israel and say to them, When you come into the land you are to inhabit, which I am giving you, and you offer _**to the LORD**_ from the herd or from the flock a food offering or a burnt offering or a sacrifice, to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering or at your appointed feasts, _**to make a pleasing aroma to the LORD**_ , then he who brings his offering __**shall offer to the LORD a grain offering**__ of a tenth of an ephah of fine flour, mixed with a quarter of a hin of oil; and you shall offer with the burnt offering, or for the sacrifice, a quarter of a hin of wine for the drink offering for each lamb. Or for a ram, you shall offer for a grain offering two tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil. And for the drink offering you shall offer a third of a hin of wine, __**a pleasing aroma to the LORD**__. And when you offer a bull as a burnt offering or sacrifice, to fulfill a vow or for peace offerings _**to the LORD**_ , then one shall offer with the bull a grain offering of three tenths of an ephah of fine flour, mixed with half a hin of oil. And you shall offer for the drink offering half a hin of wine, as a food offering, _**a pleasing aroma to the LORD**_. Thus it shall be done for each bull or ram, or for each lamb or young goat. As many as you offer, so shall you do with each one, as many as there are. Every native Israelite shall do these things in this way, in offering a food offering, _**with a pleasing aroma to the LORD**_." Numbers 15:1-13
> 
> "To you it was shown, that you might know that the LORD is God; _**there is no other besides him**_ … know therefore today, and lay it to your heart, that the LORD is God in heaven above and on the earth beneath; _**there is no other**_." Deuteronomy 4:35, 39
> 
> "Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might… It is the LORD your God you shall fear. Him you shall serve and by his name you shall swear." Deuteronomy 6:4-5, 13

Even the very Aramaic words that are employed in reference to the offerings that Nebuchadnezzar made to Daniel are used in other places in connection with the service that the priests were to give to Yahweh:

> "Now _therefore_ , Tattenai, governor of _the region_ beyond the River, and Shethar-Boznai, and your companions the Persians who _are_ beyond the River, keep yourselves far from there. Let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God on its site. Moreover I issue a decree _as to_ what you shall do for the elders of these Jews, for the building of this house of God: Let the cost be paid at the king’s expense from taxes _on the region_ beyond the River; this is to be given immediately to these men, so that they are not hindered. And whatever they need—young bulls, rams, and lambs for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the request of the priests who _are_ in Jerusalem—let it be given them day by day without fail, _**that they may offer sacrifices of _sweet aroma_ to the God of heaven**_, and pray for the life of the king and his sons." Ezra 6:6-10 NKJV
> 
> "This is a copy of the letter that King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, a man learned in matters of the commandments of the LORD and his statutes for Israel: ‘Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven. Peace. And now I make a decree that anyone of the people of Israel or their priests or Levites in my kingdom, who freely offers to go to Jerusalem, may go with you. For you are sent by the king and his seven counselors to make inquiries about Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of your God, which is in your hand, and also to carry the silver and gold that the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose dwelling is in Jerusalem, with all the silver and gold that you shall find in the whole province of Babylonia, and with the freewill offerings of the people and the priests, vowed willingly for the house of their God that is in Jerusalem. With this money, then, you shall with all diligence buy bulls, rams, and lambs, with their __**grain offerings**__ and their drink offerings, and you shall offer them on the altar of the house of your God that is in Jerusalem.’" Ezra 7:11-17

Moreover, there is one example where sacrifices that were offered to God’s human agents were outright rejected:

> "Now at Lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet. He was crippled from birth and had never walked. He listened to Paul speaking. And Paul, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to be made well, said in a loud voice, ‘Stand upright on your feet.’ And he sprang up and began walking. And when the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in Lycaonian, ‘The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!’ Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the chief speaker. And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, __brought oxen and garlands to the gates and wanted to offer sacrifice with the crowds__. But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their garments and rushed out into the crowd, crying out, ‘ _**Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men, of like nature with you**_ , and we bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to a living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them. In past generations he allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. Yet he did not leave himself without witness, for he did good by giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying your hearts with food and gladness.’ __Even with these words they scarcely restrained the people from offering sacrifice to them__." Acts 14:8-18

The foregoing leads to the conclusion that Nebuchadnezzar’s offerings were not something acceptable from God’s perspective, even though the heathen king may have thought so. We can further assume that since Daniel was a God-fearing monotheist he himself would not have been pleased with Nebuchadnezzar’s actions, much like we find in the case of Paul and Barnabas. Our exegesis is borne out by the fact that elsewhere we are expressly told that Daniel refused to eat unlawful foods and give up his daily prayers:

> "But Daniel resolved that he would not defile himself with the king's food, or with the wine that he drank. Therefore he asked the chief of the eunuchs to allow him not to defile himself. And God gave Daniel favor and compassion in the sight of the chief of the eunuchs, and the chief of the eunuchs said to Daniel, ‘I fear my lord the king, who assigned your food and your drink; for why should he see that you were in worse condition than the youths who are of your own age? So you would endanger my head with the king.’ Then Daniel said to the steward whom the chief of the eunuchs had assigned over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, ‘Test your servants for ten days; let us be given vegetables to eat and water to drink. Then let our appearance and the appearance of the youths who eat the king's food be observed by you, and deal with your servants according to what you see.’ So he listened to them in this matter, and tested them for ten days. At the end of ten days it was seen that they were better in appearance and fatter in flesh than all the youths who ate the king's food. So the steward took away their food and the wine they were to drink, and gave them vegetables." Daniel 1:8-16
> 
> "When these presidents and satraps came by agreement to the king and said to him, ‘O King Darius, live forever! All the presidents of the kingdom, the prefects and the satraps, the counselors and the governors are agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and enforce an injunction, that whoever makes petition to any god or man for thirty days, except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions. Now, O king, establish the injunction and sign the document, so that it cannot be changed, according to the law of the Medes and the Persians, which cannot be revoked.’ Therefore King Darius signed the document and injunction. When Daniel knew that the document had been signed, he went to his house where he had windows in his upper chamber open toward Jerusalem. He got down on his knees three times a day and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he had done previously. Then these men came by agreement and found Daniel making petition and plea before his God. Then they came near and said before the king, concerning the injunction, ‘O king! Did you not sign an injunction, that anyone who makes petition to any god or man within thirty days except to you, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions?’ The king answered and said, ‘The thing stands fast, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be revoked.’ Then they answered and said before the king, ‘Daniel, who is one of the exiles from Judah, pays no attention to you, O king, or the injunction you have signed, but makes his petition three times a day.’ … Then the king commanded, and Daniel was brought and cast into the den of lions. The king declared to Daniel, ‘May your God, whom you serve continually, deliver you!’ And a stone was brought and laid on the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet and with the signet of his lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel. Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting; no diversions were brought to him, and sleep fled from him. Then, at break of day, the king arose and went in haste to the den of lions. As he came near to the den where Daniel was, he cried out in a tone of anguish. The king declared to Daniel, ‘O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?’ Then Daniel said to the king, ‘O king, live forever! My God sent his angel and shut the lions' mouths, and they have not harmed me, because I was found blameless before him; and also before you, O king, I have done no harm.’ Then the king was exceedingly glad, and commanded that Daniel be taken up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no kind of harm was found on him, because he had trusted in his God." Daniel 6:6-13, 16-23

It would therefore be beneath such a righteous person to accept sacrifices and praise which belong to God alone. As the late noted Bible expositor John Gill wrote:

> _**Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel**_ …  
>  Imagining there was something of divinity in him, that he could so exactly tell him his dream, which was past and gone; and give him the interpretation of it, respecting things to come, which he concluded none but God could do; and therefore, after the manner of the eastern people, threw himself prostrate to the earth, with his face to it, and gave religious adoration to Daniel; _for that this cannot be understood of mere civil respect appears by his following orders; and had he not thought that Daniel was something more than a man, he, a proud monarch, would never have behaved in this manner to him_ ; but, being struck with amazement at the relation of the dream, and the interpretation of it, _he forgot what both he and Daniel were; the one a mighty king, the other a mere man, a servant, yea, a captive_ : this shows that he was not exasperated at the account of the fall of his monarchy, as might have been expected, but was filled with wonder at the revelation made: _**and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him**_ ;  
>  rising from the ground, he gave orders to his servants about him, some of whom might be the priests of Bel, that they would bring a meat offering, and incense with it, and offer them to him as to a god; but, though this was ordered, _we do not read it was done; for it cannot be thought that Daniel, who had scrupled eating the king's food, and drinking his wine, lest he should be defiled, and afterwards chose rather to be cast into a den of lions than to omit prayer to God, would ever suffer such a piece of idolatrous worship to be paid to him; and though he could not hinder the king's prostration and adoration, which were very sudden; yet it is highly probable he reasoned with the king upon it, and earnestly desired that no such undue honours should be paid to him; declaring that this knowledge was not of himself, but of God, to whom the glory ought to be given_.
> 
> (_The New John Gill Exposition of the Whole Bible_ ; [online source](<http://www.studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=002&verse=046>))

_**The king answered unto Daniel**_ …  
_By which it appears that Daniel interposed and expostulated with the king, and prevented the oblation to him as a god, and instructed him in the knowledge of the true God he ought to worship_ ; as the following confession of the king more clearly shows: _**and said, of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods**_ ;

([Source](<http://www.studylight.org/com/geb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=002&verse=047>); underline emphasis ours)

Jamieson, Fausset, Brown’s _Commentary Critical and Explanatory on the Whole Bible_ says something similar:

> **
> 
> 46\. fell upon . . . face, and worshipped Daniel
> 
> ** \--worshipping God in the person of Daniel. Symbolical of the future prostration of the world power before Messiah and His kingdom (Php 2:10). __As other servants of God refused such honors__ (Ac 1025, 26; 14:13-15; Re 22:8-9), and Daniel (Da 1:8) would not taste defiled food, nor give up prayer to God at the cost of his life (Da 6:7, 10), __it seems likely that Daniel rejected the proffered divine honors. The word "answered" (Da 2:47) implies that Daniel had objected to these honors__ ; and in compliance with his objection, "the king _answered,_ Of a truth, your God is a God of gods." Daniel had disclaimed all personal merit in Da 2:30, giving GOD all the glory (compare Da 2:45). ([Source](<http://www.studylight.org/com/jfb/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=002>); italic and underline emphasis ours) 

The late Matthew Henry stated:

> One might have expected that when Nebuchadnezzar was contriving to make his own kingdom everlasting he would be enraged at Daniel, who foretold the fall of it and that another kingdom of another nature should be the everlasting kingdom; but, instead of resenting it as an affront, he received it as an oracle, and here we are told what the expressions were of the impressions it made upon him. 1. He was ready to look upon Daniel as a little god. Though he saw him to be a man, yet from this wonderful discovery which he had made both of his secret thoughts, in telling him the dream, and of things to come, in telling him the interpretation of it, he concluded that he had certainly a divinity lodged in him, worthy his adoration; and therefore he _fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel,_ Daniel 2:46. It was the custom of the country by prostration to give honour to kings, because they have something of a divine power in them (_I have said, You are gods_); and therefore this king, who had often received such veneration from others, now paid the like to Daniel, whom he supposed to have in him a divine knowledge, which he was so struck with an admiration of that he could not contain himself, but forgot both that Daniel was a man and that himself was a king. Thus did God magnify divine revelation _and make it honourable,_ extorting from a proud potentate such a veneration but for one glimpse of it. He _worshipped Daniel,_ and _commanded that they should offer an oblation to him,_ and burn incense. Herein he cannot be justified, but may in some measure be excused, when Cornelius was thus ready to worship Peter, and John the angel, who both knew better. But, though it is not here mentioned, yet we have reason to think that Daniel refused these honours that he paid him, and said, as Peter to Cornelius, _Stand up, I myself also am a man,_ or, as the angel to St. John, _See thou do it not;_ for it is not said that the oblation was offered unto him, though the king commanded it, or rather _said it,_ for so the word is. He said, in his haste, _Let an oblation be offered to him._ And that Daniel did say something to him which turned his eyes and thoughts another way is intimated in what follows (Daniel 2:47), _The king answered Daniel._ Note, It is possible for those to express a great honour for the ministers of God's word who yet have no true love for the word. _Herod feared John,_ and _heard him gladly,_ and yet went on in his sins, Mark 6:20. 2. He readily acknowledged the God of Daniel to be the great God, the true God, the only living and true God. If Daniel will not suffer himself to be worshipped, he will (as Daniel, it is likely, directed him) _worship God,_ by confessing (Daniel 2:47), (_Matthew Henry Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible_ ; [online source](<http://www.studylight.org/com/mhc-com/view.cgi?book=da&chapter=002>))

Yet this is unlike what we find with the Lord Jesus since it is God himself who gives the command for his Son to be worshiped:

> "The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son, _**that all may honor the Son, JUST AS THEY HONOR THE FATHER**_. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him." John 5:22-23
> 
> "And again, when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says, ‘ _**Let all God’s angels worship him**_.’" Hebrews 1:6

In the inspired book of Revelation we not alone find the angels carrying out God’s command, we also see that all creation will worship the Son:

> "And they sang a new song, saying, ‘Worthy are you to take the scroll and to open its seals, for you were slain, _**and by your blood**_ you ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation, and you have made them a kingdom and priests to our God, and they shall reign on the earth.’ Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders the voice of many angels, numbering myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, ‘ _**Worthy is the Lamb who was slain**_ , to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might and honor and glory and blessing!’ And I heard _**EVERY CREATURE**_ in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, saying, ‘To him who sits on the throne _**and to the Lamb**_ be blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever!’ And the four living creatures said, ‘Amen!’ and the elders fell down and worshiped." Revelation 5:9-14

Amen! Come risen Lord Jesus, come. You are the holy Lamb of God who is worthy to be worshiped forever and ever.

* * *
